The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 47–76

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00388.x

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe:
Making a Good Start? An Analysis of Issues
in Law and Regulation

Maurice Schellekens
Tilburg University

Nanotechnology is the technology that concerns itself with the smallest units of matter and
promises manipulation of matter on the level of individual molecules. It is expected that
vastly improved quality of many kinds of products will be the result. The patenting of
nanotech inventions is well under way in Europe, but going down to the most elemental level
raises new and important questions. For example, how does patenting at the nano level relate
to similar technology on the super-nano level? Also fundamental questions can be asked, such
as: should matter at all be patentable at the most elemental level? This article seeks to give a
ﬁrst overview of questions of law and regulation concerning the patentability of inventions in
the ﬁeld of nanotechnology under the European Patent Convention.

Keywords Europe; nanotechnology; patentability

Nanotechnology—the technology of the smallest objects—is slowly but surely
progressing. The ﬁrst products making use of nanotechnology are appearing on
the market, among others tennis racquets, ski wax and sun cream (The Project on
Emerging Technologies, 2009). Many developments are, however, still
in the
laboratory stage. Although many developments have some way to go before
abutting into marketable products, the patenting of nanotechnology is well under
way. Using a wide deﬁnition of nanotechnology, the European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO)
identiﬁed about 108,000 patent documents relating to inventions in the ﬁeld of
nanotechnology (Kallinger, 2007). Nanotechnology is a relevant development in
patent law. Hitherto, European academic literature has given hardly any attention
to the patenting of nanotechnology. This is remarkable in view of the fact that
nanotechnology raises new and important questions of law, as well as questions
relevant for the development of the nanotechnology industry in Europe.

Patenting at the molecular level raises questions about the ‘‘ownership’’ of
matter at the molecular level. Is a composition of matter at the molecular level
different from matter at macro level and thus basically patentable ‘‘again’’? Should
the most basic substances be the ‘‘property’’ of anybody? Apart from these
fundamental questions, there is the question of how to patent nanotechnology.
Should the patent ofﬁce and courts steer towards broad or narrow patents in the
ﬁeld of nanotechnology? Should the patent ofﬁce and courts attribute extra
attention to the way nanotech patents are being disclosed? The answers to such
questions may prove to be of eminent importance to the innovation in this ﬁeld.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

47

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Which inventors will get which rights? Should the patent ofﬁce grant broad rights to
a few pioneering innovators or should the patent ofﬁce grant narrower patents both
to pioneers and follow-on innovators (Barton, 1997; Scotchmer, 1996)? Is there a
risk for a patent thicket through fragmentation of rights among many patentees or
through overlapping rights?

This article cannot deal in great depth with the panoply of questions raised by
the patenting of nanotechnology (Tullis, 2008). In order to give a ﬁrst exploration of
relevant questions, this article is structured as follows. After a short introduction
into nanotechnology, the patentability of nanotechnology inventions will be
discussed with reference to the requirements for patentability as found in the
European Patent Convention (EPC). This analysis gives a ﬁrst impression of the
possible discussion areas with respect to nanotechnology. The third section of the
article addresses the relation between nanotechnology, patents and innovation. The
fourth section will indicate some avenues for addressing the issues identiﬁed in the
third section.

What is Nanotechnology?

A nanometre is one billionth of a metre. Nanotechnology is the technology that
deals with the control of matter on a very small scale, typically less than 100 nm.
This implies that manipulation of individual molecules and atoms comes within
reach. A complete description of what nanotechnology is is not possible within the
conﬁnes of this article. Therefore, a few examples of speciﬁc nanomaterials will be
described hereinafter. In nanotechnology, there are a number of what have been
called nanomaterial platforms (Lux Research, 2005). They can be seen as examples
of building blocks of nanotechnology. Examples of nanomaterial platforms are,
inter alia, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), buckyballs or fullerenes and quantum dots.
Buckyballs and CNTs consist solely of carbon atoms that are arranged in
pentagonal or hexagonal rings. These ‘‘pentagons’’ and ‘‘hexagons’’ form spherical
(in case of buckyballs) or cylindrical (in case of CNTs) structures with a diameter of
only a few nanometres. By functionalizing them they can be made ﬁt for certain
applications. Functionalization of a platform material is the modiﬁcation of its
basic structure or the addition to it of atoms that make the molecule suitable for
speciﬁc purposes. Buckyballs can, for example, be functionalized for targeted drug
delivery within the human body. A ‘‘medicine’’ is enclosed in the buckyball and the
buckyball is functionalized in such a way that it releases the medicine only when
certain exterior conditions are encountered. The obvious advantage is that only the
part of the body where the medicine is needed receives it. Nanomaterials often have
novel properties based on quantum effects, for example in the ﬁeld of heat and
electric conductivity and strength. Because of their small scale they have a relatively
large outer surface that allows for greater chemical reactivity. Applications of
buckyballs and CNTs are in the ﬁelds of new materials, electrical engineering, for
example, for making transistors and photovoltaic cells, and in medicine, as a vessel

48

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

for drug delivery. Quantum dots are nanocrystals that function as electrical
semiconductors and ﬁnd application in electrical engineering. Quantum dots can
also be used as markers because of the ﬂuorescence they emit. They can be used as
biomarkers that, for example, signal the presence of cancer cells. For a more
complete and in-depth understanding of nanotechnology, the reader is referred to
specialist literature. The following handbooks may be useful: Borisenko and
Ossicini (2008), Pradeep (2007) and Schmid (2008).

The EPO deﬁnes nanotechnology as follows:

The term nanotechnology covers entities with a controlled geometrical
size of at least one functional component below 100 nanometres in one
or more dimensions susceptible to make physical, chemical or biological
effects available which are intrinsic to that size. It covers equipment and
methods for controlled analysis, manipulation, processing, fabrication
or measurement with a precision below 100 nanometres (EPO, 2009).

From the above, a number of characteristics of nanotechnology can be
deduced. First of all, nanotechnology concerns the smallest objects. As said before,
a nanometre is one billionth of a metre, or to put it differently: 100 nm is one ten-
thousandth of a millimetre, or 500 times thinner than a human hair. The
manipulation of matter on this level is not the prerogative of one single technolo-
gical discipline. Nanotechnology is thoroughly interdisciplinary and its applications
often are the result of a convergence of pre-existing technologies. Disciplines
involved in nanotechnology are, inter alia, chemistry, physics, biology and electro-
nics. New nanotechnological developments are often relevant across a number of
industries.

Going down to the nano scale is not just done in the interest of further
miniaturization of devices. Materials at nano scale often display characteristics that
fundamentally differ from those found in the ‘‘same’’ material at macro scale.
Although certain quantum size effects have been known to exist for about a
century, only now has it become possible to exploit them. It is a relatively recent
development that, for example, CNTs can be made and that their extraordinary
characteristics can be used. CNTs can, for example, carry much higher electrical
currents than traditional metals at macroscopic level (Letham, 2005). Nanotech-
nology holds the promise of novel products that constitute a leap forward compared
with traditional products in terms of their characteristics.

Nanotechnology is a technology that is in its infancy and is still very much the
subject of fundamental research, much of which is performed by universities and
research institutes (Sabety, 2005). In Europe, two-thirds of the research into
nanotechnology is publicly funded, compared with only 45% in the United States
(Hullmann, 2006, p. 15). This can be attributed to the huge private investment in the
United States in nanotech research. The large investments in nanotech research are
spurred on by great expectations about the beneﬁts that nanotechnology can yield.
Yet, it has hitherto proven difﬁcult to translate theoretical results into marketable

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

49

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

products. Only a few products have appeared on the market. In this respect, Europe
is lagging behind the United States (European Commission, 2004, p. 7). As with
many early technologies, there exists much uncertainty, not just about the technol-
ogy and the direction technical developments will take, but also with respect to the
regulatory context. This concerns not only patent law, but also and especially other
domains of law, such as safety regulations. Because of its small scale, nanotechnol-
ogy may pose new risks to health and the environment. For example, there are
questions with respect to the toxicity of certain nanotechnological applications. At
the same time, nanotechnology also does not readily ﬁt in with existing safety
regulations. Safety regulations for cosmetics may, for example, not take into
account that particles are so small that they can penetrate the skin. It is also
unclear how the public will perceive products with nanomaterials. Will the public be
concerned with the potential risks,
just as has been the case with genetically
modiﬁed organisms and nuclear energy? The new properties of nanomaterials,
the potential risks and the complications of applying existing regulations create
uncertainty and possibly a slowdown of innovation through longer lead times
before products reach the market. The uncertainty and possible delays enlarge the
costs of nanotechnological innovations and may thus enlarge the dependency of
companies on their nanotech patent portfolio that must help them recoup these
costs. Furthermore, the drag on the time to market makes it more difﬁcult to exploit
a technological lead and, in turn, enlarges the dependency on patents.

Despite the risks and uncertainties, the promise of nanotechnology has led
some of the largest research and development companies in Europe to enter the
nanotechnology arena, including Bayer, BASF, Carl Zeiss, Agfa-Gevaert, General
Electrics and Philips. Among the research institutes the Fraunhoferinstitut is one of
the larger centres in nanotechnology in Europe.

In order to enhance access to the growing pool of nanotechnology patents in its
patent database, the EPO has added a new tag in its patent classiﬁcation system:
‘‘Y01N’’ for ‘‘Nanotechnology’’. The tag is actually a pointer towards existing
subclasses that belong to several technology domains. Under the Y01N tag already
about 108,000 documents have been classiﬁed (Kallinger, 2007; Scheu, 2004; 2005).
The classiﬁcation is based on an expert evaluation of the patents and thus gives a
rather accurate indication of the quantitative state of nanotechnology patenting. An
alternative would have been to classify based on keywords, but this would have
given rise to less precise results.

Is Nanotechnology Patentable?

Even though many patents on nanotechnological inventions have been granted,
patenting of nanotechnology has its own problems and peculiarities. These will be
discussed hereinafter when dealing with the requirements for the patentability of
nanotechnology. The analysis of nanotechnology patenting is a necessary input to
the more fundamental questions concerning the patenting of nanotechnology.

50

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

Hereinafter, the three well-known requirements for patentability—novelty, inven-
tive step and industrial applicability—are discussed. Sufﬁciency of disclosure—a
requirement for patent applications—is dealt with as well. At the end of this section,
it will be investigated whether the exceptions to patentable subject matter could be
applicable to certain nanotechnological inventions.

Novelty
As is well known, an invention is novel if it is not part of the state of the art. Also,
nanotechnology inventions must be new to be patentable. Since nanotechnology is
mainly characterized by its size, a number of size-related questions arise: how do
nano-scale inventions relate to prior art that does not speciﬁcally relate to a nano
size? Could such prior art anticipate a nano-scale invention? Could prior art that
refers to micro or larger scale defeat the novelty of a nano-scale invention? Is size
alone enough to confer novelty upon an invention? What happens if size ranges
mentioned in a prior art document and a nano-scale patent application overlap?

An invention is only anticipated if it has been described completely—that is
with all its elements—in the prior art. If the prior art refers only to the micro or
larger scale, the nano-scale equivalent is generally not anticipated. In Orica
Australia/BASF (T0547/99), the Technical Board of Appeal (TBA) addressed the
issue of size. Orica’s patent concerned (addition polymer) particles of less than
100 nm that because of their core-sheath structure can be stably dispersed in liquids.
The ability to disperse very small particles is especially useful in the production of
surface coatings: the smaller the particle size of the ﬁlm-former the better the
penetration into porous substrates and the higher the gloss. BASF sought revoca-
tion of the patent, inter alia, on the basis of lack of novelty. It adduced a prior US
patent (D3) about dispersions for the preparation of high gloss coatings. The
teachings of this patent were limited to a minimum particle size of 111 nm.1 The
TBA found no implicit disclosure of particle sizes of between 10 and 100 nm and
upheld Orica’s patent. This decision is, however, not completely decisive on the size
issue: apart from size there was another essential feature of Orica’s patent, a
polymerization initiation temperature of under 40 1C, needed for the preparation of
the particles, that was also not disclosed in the prior art. Although the decision in
Orica Australia/BASF is thus not completely conclusive on the issue of size, little or
no problems are to be expected, if the ranges mentioned in a patent and the prior art
are disjunctive. More interesting is the question what happens if there is an overlap
between the ranges mentioned in a patent about a nano-scale invention and those
mentioned in the existing prior art. The issue of overlapping ranges was addressed
in Smithkline Beecham Biologicals/Wyeth (T552/00).2 The invention in this case
concerned the adjuvant qualities of a lipid (3-O-deacylated monophosphoryl lipid A
[3D-MPL]) in a vaccine. An adjuvant substance in a vaccine is in itself not effective,
but if it is combined with an effective substance it reinforces the latter’s effective-
ness. The adjuvant effect of 3D-MPL can, according to the patent, be improved by
reducing its particle size. The patent in question describes experiments that

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

51

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

empirically demonstrate the improvement in effectiveness at smaller particle sizes;
the reason why this effect occurs is not given. The patent indicates a range for the
particle size (60–120 nm) that partially overlaps with a range mentioned in prior art
documents (80–500 nm). Did this prior art document destroy the novelty of the
invention? The TBA formulated as its criterion whether a person skilled in the art
would seriously contemplate applying the technical teaching of the prior art
document in the range of overlap. The TBA found this not to be the case. It
mentioned a number of circumstances that directed it to this ﬁnding: the overlap
situates itself at an extremity of the ‘‘prior art’’ range and represents only 10% of
this broad range; the prior art does not provide the person skilled in the art with any
guidance for preparing particles with a speciﬁc size within the range; it does not
indicate any preferred sub-range; applying the teachings of the prior art, the person
skilled in the art would probably end up with particles with a mean size of 375 nm
and he would know that the size distribution of the particles follows a Gauss-curve.
For these reasons, the overlap was not considered novelty defeating. The circum-
stances of this case do not seem to be unusual for situations of overlapping ranges
and may therefore apply in many more cases.

Another example is the decision in Celanese Acetate/Rhodia Acetow (T0006/02)
about the degradable agent in cigarette ﬁlters (titanium dioxide).3 A prior document
mentioned TiO2 particle size of 10–1,000 nm, whereas the patent under investiga-
tion mentioned particle size of less than 100 nm. The TBA did not hold the overlap
to be novelty destroying. In its reasoning, it held that the particle sizes in the prior art
document indicated a particle size distribution, not an average particle size.
Furthermore, the document only speciﬁcally disclosed an example of an average
particle size of 300 nm and that was outside the claimed range. So, the claimed
invention was not anticipated although there was an overlap in the ranges. The
patent ofﬁce does not purely look quantitatively at the outer edges of a range, but
assesses what relevance different parts of the range have in the prior art documents
at hand. If the prior art document does not seriously contemplate the application of
the invention in the overlapping part of the range, there seems to be no problem in
claiming an overlapping range. At the same time, this raises the question whether
this practice does lay the foundation for a patent thicket, a dense web of overlapping
patents that obliges licensees to take licences from multiple patentees. A thicket is
especially ‘‘thorny’’ if there is a risk of hold-ups (Shapiro, 2001). That risk could
materialize in nanotechnology given its cross-industry character, as described below
in ‘‘The uneasy relation between nanotechnology and the patent system’’.

Hitherto, we have looked at prior art that explicitly refers to size. If, however,
the prior art does not refer to size, could a nano-scale invention be anticipated? Is
the novelty of the nano-scale invention destroyed simply because it is covered by the
terms of a prior art document? This is not necessarily the case. In the ﬁrst place, the
prior art is only novelty destroying if it contains an enabling disclosure. Even
though a nano-scale invention is covered by the terms of a prior art document, it
may still be novel if the person skilled in the art cannot practise the invention at the

52

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

nano scale without knowledge of the claimed invention or engaging in inventive
activity. If it is not clear to the person skilled in the art how to manufacture a nano-
scale variant of the prior art invention, this could well be enough to preserve the
novelty of the nano-scale invention. An analogy can be made with patents on
chemical compounds. The TBA held in ICI (T206/83) that:4

It is the view of the Board that a document does not effectively disclose a
chemical compound, even though it states the structure and the steps by
which it is produced, if the skilled person is unable to ﬁnd out from the
document or from common general knowledge how to obtain the
required starting materials or intermediates. Information, which can
only be obtained after a comprehensive search is not to be regarded as
part of common general knowledge.

If it is unclear how to arrive at the nano-scale invention, the ‘‘chemical’’
analogy suggests that the invention may still be novel. This ﬁnding is also consistent
with US patent law. ‘‘In re Kumar’’ concerned an invention about the use of
‘‘Aluminium oxide particles’’ for polishing surfaces. In the Kumar case, which is
claimed to be the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit’s (CAFC) ﬁrst nanotech
case, the CAFC approved that prior art only takes away the patentability of an
invention if the prior disclosure was enabling. This is consistent with decisions by
the EPO on European patents, be it that the ﬁnding of the CAFC related to the
patentability requirement of non-obviousness, and not to novelty (Baluch et al.,
2005). The knowledge about how to arrive at nano-scale inventions will develop
with the years. In the coming years, non-size-related prior art may become ever
more enabling prior art.

Perhaps a more fundamental question with respect to nanotechnology concerns
inherency (Axford, 2006, p. 306). Under the theory of inherency, a substance known
in the prior art cannot become novel again by the simple fact that a new, useable
property of the substance has been found.5 The idea is that the property has always
been inherently present and thus cannot confer novelty upon the known substance.
Nanotechnology challenges our understanding of inherency. If a substance is
manipulated at molecular level, does it become another substance that may be
novel again or is it still the same substance of which now some hitherto unknown
property has been uncovered but that always has been inherently present? This
raises the question under what conditions two materials can be said to be identical:
how many properties must they share and in how many properties may they differ?
I can imagine that if many properties differ there comes a point at which you no
longer say that ‘‘it is the same substance with many unexpected properties’’. At that
point the substances will have become different substances. Does nanotechnology
reach this point? In literature, it has been contended that if a substance exhibits
properties at the nano scale that fundamentally differ from the properties that occur
at the macro scale, novelty defeating inherency cannot exist (Germinario, 2006).
However, even if there is a point beyond which substances are different enough at

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

53

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

the nano and macro level, this does not tell us how to ﬁnd this transition point: what is
a fundamental difference? There remains a substantial grey area, including whether a
nano-scale invention is patentable even if characteristics are improved over, but not
completely absent from, the same substance before nano-level manipulation.

Finally, there may be rare situations in which nano manipulation takes place
without the craftsman knowing, or having known, that what he does is actually
nano-manipulation. If a substance exhibits certain properties, while in hindsight
those properties are the result of effects that take place at nano level and the person
skilled in the art knows how to arrive at the substance, the substance exhibiting the
‘‘nano level-speciﬁc’’ properties is part of the prior art and cannot be patented
‘‘again’’. An example may be Damascus steel, which was used for swordmaking in
the Middle East. It is very strong and particularly good at holding an edge. Recent
research suggests that its extraordinary properties are caused by CNTs (Sanderson,
2006). Damascus steel does not become novel again because we now know why it so
strong6 or because we now perhaps have other ways of making it. As a consequence,
new patents on nano-manipulated substances must steer clear from well-known
substances that—unknown to their creators—exhibit properties that are based on
nano-effects.

In conclusion, although patentability of nanotechnology invention can be
questioned in certain cases, the existing patent law framework gives enough inroads
to confer novelty upon most nano-scale inventions. This mainly derives from
applying well-known patent principles to nano-scale inventions.

Inventive Step
In order to be patentable, an invention must involve an inventive step, that is, it
must not be obvious to the person skilled in the art, having regard to the state of the
art. Even if a nano-scale invention is novel over the prior art, the inventive step
requirement must be met. A ﬁrst question to ask in relation to nanotech inventions
is whether downsizing in itself is not an obvious step for the person skilled in the art
to take. For example, such reasoning can be raised with microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS). The top-down
approach to manufacturing MEMS and NEMS can be used iteratively to produce
ever-smaller structures, from millimetre structures to micro- and nanostructures.
From the decision of the TBA in Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania/
Affymetrix (T0070/99) about micro-scale analytical devices, it can, however, be
derived that mere downscaling does not give rise to an inventive step.7 The
invention in this case concerned a micro-scale device for analysing a ﬂuid, cell-
containing sample. The claimed device had ﬂow passages with dimensions between
0.1 and to 500 mm, which was smaller than the existing devices had. There were,
however, various known reasons for further miniaturization, such as savings on the
sample volume and reagent costs. The TBA held that:

. . . miniaturisation was something like a trend in the ﬁeld of devices
for the (bio)chemical analysis of samples and of devices for the

54

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

manipulation of cells. Even before the priority dates of the contested
patent, a skilled person was thus incited to ‘‘pack’’ known methods into
smaller devices such that they become suitable for handling small sample
volumes.

Miniaturization was in the ﬁeld of analysis equipment an obvious measure to
take and I assume that this holds for many more ﬁelds. Purely based on their small
scale, nanotech inventions may therefore not be inventive. What then are ways to
confer inventiveness on a nano-scale invention? An inventive step may reside in the
fact that other processes have to be used to arrive at the nano-scale products than is
the case with bigger products. The other processes must of course not be obvious to
the person skilled in the art, confronted with the problem of producing at the nano
scale (Scott Roe, 2006). An example is the invention dealt with in AT&T (T0268/
96). The invention in this case concerned the fabrication of a semiconductor so
small that the conventional patterning techniques using photoresist layers were at
the limits of their performance.8 The closest prior art described a patterning and
etching process that required a mask layer that was epitaxially deposited. The
invention under consideration in AT&T solved the problem of ﬁnding an alternative
mask layer. The solution was found to be inventive in that it not only contained an
alternative material for the mask layer, viz. native oxide, but also an etching agent
suitable for the new material of the mask. This combination did not follow in an
obvious way from the state of the art. The patent under consideration in AT&T was
thus found to be inventive.9

Apart from speciﬁc processes for arriving at a nano-scale invention, inventiveness
can be derived from other sources as well. If there is a new unexpected function at the
nano scale, this may give rise to an inventive step. The unexpected function must solve
a problem stated in the patent. Such unexpected results have been known to occur in
nanotechnology. CNTs can—dependent on their construction—carry a much bigger
current per surface unit than traditional metal conductors (Letham, 2005). The
unexpected function must, however, not be a mere side or bonus effect. If there are
good reasons for a person skilled in the art to go down the road of the invention, then
the occurrence of an ‘‘unexpected’’ bonus effect does not contribute towards
inventiveness. The aforementioned case Smithkline Beecham Biologicals/Wyeth
provides an example of an unexpected function that was not a mere bonus effect
but did help establish the inventiveness. The problem the invention in Smithkline
Beecham Biologicals/Wyeth solved was to improve the adjuvant qualities of 3D-MPL
(a lipid) in a vaccine. The solution brought forward by the invention was to reduce the
particle size of the 3D-MPL to below 120 nm (claim 1), to between 60 and 120 nm
(claim 2) or even below 100 nm (claim 3). None of the identiﬁed prior art documents
suggested that a reduction of the particle size would be of any advantage. Hence, the
prior art did not lead in an obvious manner to the claimed invention.

A prior art document did, however, mention particle sizes and the ranges
mentioned slightly overlapped with those in the newly claimed invention. But the

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

55

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

small overlap did not take away the inventiveness that lay in the improvement of the
adjuvant qualities by reducing the particle size. The TBA remarked that the size of
the particles mentioned in the prior art followed a certain distribution, the
extremities of which were 100 and 400 nm, hence centred around a mean size of
250 nm. As we saw when dealing with novelty, an overlap at one extremity of a
range is not per se considered damaging for the patentability of a new invention.
Are there still other ways for nano-scale inventions to acquire inventiveness?
One way is that a prejudice has to be overcome in order to arrive at a nano-scale
invention. A prejudice is ‘‘a widely held but incorrect opinion of a technical fact’’
(EPO, 2006, p. 134). Such prejudice could be that the technical difﬁculty to reduce
dimension to the nano scale could not be overcome. The impossibility to overcome
the difﬁculty must be the unanimous experience and notion of the experts in the
ﬁeld. The idea of prejudice is thus very strictly applied and it will become more
difﬁcult to use when knowledge of nanotechnology develops further and more
insight is gained into what can be done and what cannot.

The determination of inventiveness obviously depends on how the person
skilled in the art is deﬁned. This will be dealt with below in ‘‘Person skilled in the
art’’. In conclusion, based on long-standing EPO practice, there are many inroads
to confer inventiveness upon nano-scale inventions.

Industrial Applicability
For an invention to be susceptible to industrial application, it must be possible that
it is made or used in any kind of industry, including agriculture. This requirement
may become relevant for inventions in the ﬁeld of nanotechnology in several ways.
Nanotechnology is still in its infancy and many applications have not pro-
gressed beyond the laboratory stage and lack a practical use. Patents may claim
platform materials that now have no directly available application, but may have
many in the future. A general indication of possible or future applications may make
for a broad patent, covering a wide area, potentially hindering later developers of
applications that are far removed from the platforms they are based on (Almeling,
2004). In the context of biotechnology, the EPO has refused patents for substances
without a concrete application (T0870/04, about MPI’s BDP1 polypeptide):

. . . there must be a borderline between what can be accepted, and what
can only be categorized as an interesting research result which per se
does not yet allow a practical industrial application to be identiﬁed.
Even though research results may be a scientiﬁc achievement of
considerable merit, they are not necessarily an invention which can be
applied industrially.

This decision may be coloured by the fact that it concerned a substance found
in
in nature. That is not always the case in nanotechnology. Nevertheless,
nanotechnology, it has proven difﬁcult to translate laboratory results into market-
able products. A cautionary approach towards too rosy projections of patentees

56

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

about the possibilities of turning nano-structured materials into industrially pro-
ducible products seems in order. This is also in line with US patent law. In Brenner v
Manson, the US Supreme court—dealing with an invention in the ﬁeld of chem-
istry—held:10

. . . a process patent in the chemical ﬁeld, which has not been developed
and pointed to the degree of speciﬁc utility, creates a monopoly of
knowledge which should be granted only if clearly commanded by the
statute. Until the process claim has been reduced to production of a
product shown to be useful, the metes and bounds of that monopoly are
not capable of precise delineation. It may engross a vast, unknown, and
perhaps unknowable area. Such a patent may confer power to block off
whole areas of scientiﬁc development, without compensating beneﬁt to
the public.

It has been pointed out that industrial applicability need not consist in the
ability to make a product for the public at large. Basic materials may have a use as
research tools and they may through this route ﬁnd application in industry
(Forman, 2002). The TBA addressed this issue in its MPI case (T0870/04):

No doubt exists that a BDP1 polypeptide could be ‘‘made and used’’ as a
further tool, in addition to the many already available in the art (cf.
document D12), for exploring the complex cellular signal transduction
pathways and their implications in the regulation of cellular processes
and, possibly, disease states. But the whole burden is left to the reader to
guess or ﬁnd a way to exploit it in industry by carrying out work in
search for some practical application geared to ﬁnancial gain, without
any conﬁdence that any practical application exists.

It appears that a research tool only has industrial application if it has a concrete
use as a research instrument without the necessity to engage in further research. For
example, concrete laboratory techniques can be patented. In the context of
nanotechnology, the following invention may be mentioned: Gold nano stoves
for microsecond DNA melting analysis; this invention allows for faster and large-
scale analysis of DNA (Stehr et al., 2008). If, however, an invention is merely an
interesting and potentially useful object for further research, there is no industrial
applicability.

A related issue could be that it is sometimes not yet possible to produce nano-
scale substances in large amounts. The production of CNT at an industrial scale is
still not completely solved (Wang et al., 2002). The various ways of producing
graphene—single atom thick sheets of carbon—are still hampered by drawbacks
that impede large scale production (Baluch et al., 2008, pp. 291–2). The limited
production of materials may cast doubt over the industrial applicability of a patent
on a nano-scale substance. It is difﬁcult to build an industry on tiny quantities of a
substance.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

57

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Another element that may become relevant under industrial applicability is the
effectiveness of nanotech inventions. Do they produce the results that patentees
claim they do? Although nanotechnology is somewhat less of an uncertain science
than biotechnology, it is still difﬁcult to verify that nanotech inventions work as
claimed by the patentee. Because of the small scale, instruments to measure effects
on a nano scale and even metrologies are often lacking. If nanotech effects are
claimed that go against mainstream scientiﬁc wisdom, the disclosure of the invention
must be elaborate enough for the person skilled in the art to see that it does indeed
work. An invention that does not work has generally no practical use and therefore
does not meet the requirement of industrial applicability. The invention could also
be refused on the basis of insufﬁciency of disclosure. In fact, the TBA seems to prefer
inventions to be refused on the latter ground because it speciﬁcally sees to the
performability of inventions (T718/96). In the section on sufﬁciency of disclosure,
the issue of a failure to yield results as claimed is addressed as well.

Sufﬁciency of Disclosure
Sufﬁciency of disclosure encompasses two requirements: (1) that the invention is
disclosed in a way that allows the person skilled in the art to practice it and (2) that
the (teaching of the) invention must be reproducible. The ﬁrst requirement
‘‘practicability’’ means that the person skilled in the art on the basis of the
disclosure can rework the invention without undue burden. Reproducibility means
that the result of the invention can be reached over and again and not just on the
basis of chance or only with a smaller or larger degree of predictability.

What issues does the disclosure of nanotechnological inventions raise? Above
we saw that patents in the nanotech domain often mention size ranges. Case law
relating to non-nanotechnology has addressed the relation between ranges and the
practicability of an invention: practicability requires that if a general principle has
been disclosed according to which the inventive teaching is applicable to an entire
class there must not exist serious doubt as to the effectiveness of the principle across
the class. In Exxon (T0409/91), it was decided that the application as ﬁled must
contain sufﬁcient information to allow a person skilled in the art, using his common
general knowledge, to carry out the invention within the whole area that is
claimed.11

Likewise, if a nanotechnology patent has been deﬁned by a range, the invention
must be practicable in the entire range. With nanotechnology, however, it may be
difﬁcult to ascertain this fact due to the small scale at which the invention must be
practised. This gives extra weight to the question who carries the burden of proof of
the practicability of the invention. The general rule with respect to the burden of
proof has been formulated in PALM Microlaser-Technologie/Leica Microsystems
(T0487/03). The following quotation is an unofﬁcial translation of the original
German text:12

The sentence in directive D V 4.3. mentioned by the opponent states that
the patentee carries the burden of proof of the practicability of the

58

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

invention, in case the Opposition Division seriously doubts it [e.g. when
the opponent supports the doubts with trials].13

If the examining or opposition division has no way of knowing or inferring the
practicability of a nanotechnology invention, let alone its practicability across an
entire range, it may very well require the patent applicant or patentee to beef up its
disclosure and provide more detailed instructions for the reworking of the inven-
tion. The patent ofﬁce may require the applicant to show how it established that the
invention is practicable in the entire range.

Also the determination that the invention produces the claimed results in a
repeatable way may pose problems for nanotech inventors. In nanotechnology,
being a new technology, analytical methods, tools and metrologies are often not
available to the person skilled in the art. Without these, the reproducibility of an
invention may be difﬁcult to ascertain. Hence, an inventor in the nanotech ﬁeld may
be obliged to disclose these in the patent in order to make his claims veriﬁable
(Almeling, 2004, p.14). Also in the United States, it is advocated that a strong
presumption of compliance with the written description requirement should not be
applied to nanotechnology (Paredes, 2006). The reason to do so is the prevention of
a possible patent thicket.

Non-Patentable Inventions
The EPC excludes certain inventions from patentability. Computer programs and
methods for doing business are ‘‘as such’’ excluded from patentability. Inventions
concerning diagnosis and therapy of the human body are not patentable, as are
inventions the publication or exploitation of which offends against morality or
ordre public. It has been claimed that nanotechnology is much less affected by such
exclusions than other technologies, such as computer software and biotechnology
(Dixon, 2004, p. 103). It is, however, questionable whether that will prove to be true
for nanotechnology in general. Convergence of technologies will make it increas-
ingly difﬁcult to differentiate between technologies. For example, nanotechnology is
an important instrument for medicine and life sciences: nano-scale drug delivery
systems are but one example. Scientometric research shows that the ﬁeld of
nanotechnology is heavily involved in convergence: medicine and life sciences are
placed third and fourth on the list of ﬁelds in which most nanotech patent
applications were ﬁled (Kanama, 2006). An example of the problems that the
convergence may give rise to is provided by the European Group on Ethics (EGE).
It draws attention to the problem that applications of nanomedicine may be both
treatment and product, casting doubt about the applicability of the exclusion from
patentability of the therapeutic treatment of the human body as given in article
53(c) of the EPC, which replaces the former article 52(4) of the EPC (EGE, 2007,
p.47). The EGE does alas not spin out the problem it observes, but it could be
imagined that a drug delivery system could both be seen as a treatment (delivery of
medicine in the part of the body where it needs to be) and as a product (a dendrimer
carrying the medicine). Nevertheless, it is questionable whether this will make many

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

59

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

inventions unpatentable. In practice, the perceived unpatentability may be easily
avoided by an adequate formulation of the claims. If the dendrimer is claimed as a
product, article 53(c) of the EPC does not stand in the way of patentability. If it is
part of a method claim, the claim may indeed run afoul of article 53(c) of the EPC
but only if the other conditions of the article are also met, for example if the method
involves treatment of the human body and not just acts that can be performed in a
test tube. It would require a particular set of circumstances to have a nanomedicine
invention that is not patentable at all.

Apart from the exclusion of article 53(c) of the EPC, the exclusion of article 52
of the EPC may also be relevant. According to article 52(2) of the EPC, for example,
discoveries are not to be regarded as inventions within the meaning of the EPC. This
exclusion from patentability may be relevant with respect to (nano-ordered)
substances occurring in nature. Merely ﬁnding such a substance that was previously
unrecognized is a discovery (Guidelines C-IV 2.3). Some nanomaterials, such as
buckyballs, are naturally occurring (Gerhardt et al., 1987). Hence, they may not be
patentable. However, it has to be kept in mind that only discoveries as such are not
patentable (article 52(3) of the EPC). The ‘‘as such’’ clause opens many avenues to
patent invention that intuitively may seem discoveries. Substances occurring in
nature could beneﬁt from the opening provided by the ‘‘as such’’ clause and may be
patentable. Obviously, to be patentable an invention has to be built around the
natural substance. An invention could, for example, reside in the fact that a
property of the natural substance can be put to practical use, for example a nano
substance occurring in nature that has superconductive properties could be used to
make more efﬁcient electrically conducting components. The natural substance
could then be patented as part of this invention. The invention could also exist in
the isolation of the substance from its natural environment, assuming that such
isolation did not yet belong to the state of the art. In the context of nano materials,
the use of materials found in nature may, however, not be the only issue. It may be
the case that a substance is synthesized that is equal to a natural occurrence of the
substance. These synthesized substances may be patentable as well. By describing
how the synthetic substance can be arrived at, a technical teaching is already
provided, although that is not enough to get a product patent on a substance that
can also be extracted from nature. In addition to the synthesis itself, an invention
justifying a product claim could, for example, exist in the fact that the synthesized
substance is available in a purer form than its natural counterpart. The invention
could also be found in any of the above-mentioned ways.

In the nano-context, a speciﬁc complication could arise because there are
synthesized substances of which it is unknown whether they have a counterpart
occurring in nature. This is, for example, the case with CNTs (Dunens et al., 2008).
Given their physical properties, the existence of CNTs in nature is theoretically not
unlikely, but it has never been shown that they actually exist (Dunens et al., 2008).
In the absence of proof of a natural occurrence, these substances could for the time
being be patented without the use of the invention-inducing strategies mentioned

60

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

above. Whether that is a wise strategy for a patentee is of course a different
question.

If a substance is proven to occur in nature only after its synthesized counterpart
has been patented, the question could arise whether this would mean that in
hindsight the patent is invalid assuming that the patentee has not taken steps to
distance the patented substance form its natural counterpart. Literature seems to
tend towards allowing such patents (Benkard and Asendorf, 2006, p. 112), the
argument being that the synthesized substance was new, given that the naturally
occurring variety was not proven to exist at the priority or application date and not
available to the person skilled in the art. An objection to this line of arguing could
be that allowing these patents leads to a further erosion of the unpatentability of
discoveries. This may hold especially in nanotechnology where the proof of a
natural occurrence is sometimes very difﬁcult. On the other hand, it can be reasoned
that if a natural occurrence cannot be proven to exist, let alone be used by the
person skilled in the art, what is then the actual relevance of the naturally occurring
substance for industry? The ratio of the exclusion of discoveries is that nobody
should receive a legal monopoly for something that is already available to society.
That is here obviously not the case (if the priority or application date is taken as the
determinative date). This may, however, still leave open the possibility to invalidate
the patent once the natural occurrence has been proven, just like a patent can be
invalidated on the basis of novelty destroying documents that are only found after
the grant. In my view, the certainty required for the patent system to work resists
this. The later proof of natural occurrence can be distinguished from the situation
where novelty destroying publications are found after the grant. The publications
could have been brought to light before the grant of the patent, had the search to
uncover them been thorough enough. The proof of a natural existence on the other
hand is not something that could have been uncovered. It is an addition to the body
of knowledge. I would therefore take the stance that the patentee need not expect
that its patent be invalidated on something that is purely speculative at the moment
of the ﬁrst application.

Furthermore, by allowing patents on synthesized varieties two desirable
incentives may be created. In the ﬁrst place, there is of course the incentive to
create the synthesized substance. But also for other actors, an incentive is created,
namely to show the existence of a natural occurrence. Competitors or non-
commercial entities such as universities may be spurred to prove the natural
existence as soon as possible in order to force potential patent applicants to modify
their applications accordingly.

The Uneasy Relation Between Nanotechnology and the Patent System

The patent system is designed to spur innovation. Nanotechnology has, however,
some characteristics that hinder the patent system in stimulating innovation
(compare Boldrin and Levine, 2002). I will consider here three such characteristics

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

61

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

in particular. In the ﬁrst place nanotechnology is science based. Second, it is
interdisciplinary. Finally, it crosses the borders of industries. I will ﬁrst deal with
the scientiﬁc nature of nanotechnology.

The Scientiﬁc Nature of Nanotechnology
The scientiﬁc character of nanotechnology has a number of implications for the
application of patent law. Some of these implications nanotechnology shares with
biotechnology also was and is very much science based. I discern the following
implications: universities are relatively over represented among the patentees. What
is patented may lie close to results of fundamental research and have great blocking
power. The transfer into marketable products often still requires non-obvious steps.
The patentability of inventions can only be adequately ascertained by somebody
having good knowledge of the academic discussion and literature in the ﬁeld of
nanotechnology. Hereinafter, I will elaborate these implications of the science-
based character of nanotechnology.

Nanotechnology is a technology that is still very much the subject of funda-
mental research, much of which is performed by universities and research institutes.
As we saw above both in Europe and the United States, a substantial percentage of
the research into nanotechnology is publicly funded (Hullmann, 2006, p. 15).
Universities appear to be particularly avid patentees. They are also in a relatively
strong position when negotiating licences on their patent portfolio. Since they are
not in the business of manufacturing goods their need to obtain licences from other
patentees are relatively low. That makes them much less vulnerable for an
accusation of patent infringement and that,
in turn, gives them leeway when
negotiating the conditions for licences on their own patent portfolio (Lemley,
2008). In reality, the situation at the negotiation table is a bit more nuanced.
Universities may feel that it is their moral duty to make sure that their research
results ﬁnd wide application in society and this may ring through in their licensing
policies. Universities are also for other reasons than selling patent licences depen-
dent upon commercial companies. They will want to maintain good relations with
commercial companies for purposes such as the acquisition of contract research
and access to expensive equipment. This circumstance may also make for a more
balanced situation in the negotiation room. Nevertheless, there will be great
differences between the licensing policies of universities and, for a university, not
every company may be as important as those with which it maintains close ties.
These multifaceted situations will translate into a wide variety of constellations for
licence negotiations. In the end, licences on patents held by universities may not be
as easy to obtain as may be thought in the ﬁrst instance.

Since research with respect to nanotechnology is to a large extent performed by
universities, much of it bears a fundamental character. Basic ideas, substances and
processes are being developed. Just as with biotechnology, fears exist that the
building blocks of the technology will end up being patented and that the patents
complicate further research. Although these fears may not always be justiﬁed

62

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

(Walsh et al., 2003), according to US patent law expert Lemley, these fears are
justiﬁed in the ﬁeld of nanotechnology (Lemley, 2005). In other technical ﬁelds,
such as computers, software,
the internet and—surprisingly—biotechnology,
patenting allegedly started only after development of the technology was in full
swing. In nanotechnology, patents were granted directly from the start of the
scientiﬁc development. As a consequence, in the nanotech industry, patents on the
basic ideas—the building blocks—of the technology are much more prevalent. This
could burden downstream innovators as it is practically impossible to invent around
basic ideas and elements of a discipline. However, it must be kept in mind that
nanotechnology cannot be treated as one homogeneous technology. For example,
the situation between the various nanomaterial platforms—basic molecules—can be
very different. Examples of nanomaterial platforms are, inter alia, CNTs, bucky-
balls or fullerenes and quantum dots. From platform to platform there are
differences between the density of the patent landscape and the degree in which
patents are entangled. This becomes all too evident when comparing the patent
landscapes for buckyballs and CNTs. There are no broad patents claiming bucky-
balls per se (Lemley, 2005, p. 614). A reason may be that buckyballs spontaneously
occur in nature (Gerhardt et al., 1987). At the same time, CNTs per se are being
claimed in a number of patents. Three patents are often named because of their
broad scope: US5747161 a patent of NEC, US5424054 a patent of IBM and
US6683783, a patent of Carbon Nanotechnologies (Action Group on Erosion,
Technology and Concentration [ETC Group], 2005; Harris and Bawa, 2007;
Lemley, 2005). A fourth patent could be mentioned in this respect as well:
US4663230, a patent of Hyperion. This concerns a composition of matter using
CNTs. Its ﬁrst claim reads:

An essentially cylindrical discrete carbon ﬁbril characterized by a
substantially constant diameter between about 3.5 and about 70
nanometers,
length greater than about 102 times the diameter, an
outer region of multiple essentially continuous layers of ordered
carbon atoms and a distinct inner core region, each of the layers and
core disposed substantially concentrically about the cylindrical axis of
the ﬁbril.

This is a broad claim and applications using CNTs must closely guard that they
do not infringe this patent. The patent has also been ﬁled in Europe (EP0205556).
The European patent’s ﬁrst claim is, however, narrowed down somewhat by the
inclusion of an extra qualiﬁcation: ‘‘said ﬁbril is substantially free from pyrolytically
deposited thermal carbon’’. In the European patent, a purer form is claimed. When
considering CNTs and buckyballs as building blocks, it appears that the former are
the object of broad patent claims, whereas the latter not or at least much less so.
It could be asked whether these differences have predictive value for the level of
innovation. Starting from traditional concerns about the effects of patents on
building blocks, one would expect that innovation in CNTs would suffer. However,

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

63

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

the opposite seems to be the case. When looking at the number of patent
applications, it appears that there are ﬁve times as many applications about CNTs
than there are about buckyballs (Michalitsch et al., 2008, p. 86). The buckyball
patent landscape also shows many abandoned patents (Lux Research, 2005). These
patent-based indications are in accordance with the trend signalled in literature:
expectations for CNTs are high (Harris and Bawa, 2007). Buckyballs have
disappointed in not living up to the high expectations that existed when they were
ﬁrst discovered (Ball, 2005; Michalitsch et al., 2008, p. 86).

So perhaps the potential for technical and commercial success is more
important indicators for innovation than the existence of patents on building
blocks. That does, however, not take away that innovation might have been higher
if patents on building blocks would not have existed in the ﬁrst place. The building
block patents may very well create uncertainty because it may be unclear whether
innovative activities are covered by the patents and, if so, it may be unclear whether
the patents are valid. Especially, the uncertainty may have adverse effects on
innovation. Concerns about patents on building blocks can therefore not be
discarded and may need to be addressed.

The building blocks of nanotechnology must ultimately lead to concrete
products and services so that the great expectations about the beneﬁts that
nanotechnology can yield are met. Yet, it has hitherto proven difﬁcult to translate
theoretical results into marketable products. Only a few products have appeared on
the market. In this respect, Europe is lagging behind the United States (European
Commission, 2004, p. 7). This may indicate that patents are being granted on
inventions that have no or at least a very thin industrial applicability. This
reinforces the fear expressed above that patents may be granted on basic ideas in
nanotechnology.

According to research by Meyer, nano patents tend to cite only other patents
and to a much smaller degree scientiﬁc research papers (Meyer, 2001, p. 298). This is
remarkable in view of the fact that nanotechnology is very much a science-based
discipline. This raises the question whether relevant prior art escapes the patent
examiners’ attention. If this is the case, patents are being granted on inventions that
are not novel or lack inventiveness.

The Interdisciplinary and Cross-Industry Character of Nanotechnology
Above we have seen how the scientiﬁc character of nanotechnology sits uneasily
with the patent system. Here, I investigate how the patent system relates to the
interdisciplinary and cross-industry character of nanotechnology. I will start with
the former. The manipulation of matter on the nanometre level
is not the
prerogative of one single technological discipline. Nanotechnology is thoroughly
interdisciplinary and its applications often are the result of a convergence of pre-
existing technologies. Disciplines involved in nanotechnology are, inter alia, chem-
istry, physics, biology and electronics. The interdisciplinary character may mean
that nanotech patent applications sometimes end up with examiners having

64

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

expertise X while other applications end up with examiners having expertise Y. The
divisions between examiners with different expertises holds a certain risk for
overlooking prior art.14 Also the lack of a uniform terminology in nanotechnology
may magnify the risk of prior art remaining undetected.

The interdisciplinary character goes hand in hand with the cross-industry
character of nanotechnology. The cross-industry character is, however, mainly
important for the manufacturing stage of nanotechnology. It exposes innovators to
a greater risk of being accused of patent infringement. On the one hand, this is due
to patentees from other industrial sectors who may feel less inhibited to enforce
their patents against innovators outside their own industrial sector. On the other
hand, this problem is exacerbated by the added complexity of compliance checking.
A company becoming active in the ﬁeld of nanotechnology cannot limit its
compliance checks to the industrial sector where it is active. A company will need
to check patents in other industries as well, since these patents may read on its
activities. Given the size of patent databases, the search for relevant patents may
amount to a gigantean task. Missing a relevant patent may prove to be very
expensive. Especially if a company has already heavily invested in a technology or a
product, there is a distinct risk of a hold-up. As we saw above, the risk of hold-ups is
exacerbated by the occurrence of overlapping patents.

Interim Conclusion
From the described characteristics of nanotechnology, a certain risk for over-
patenting can theoretically be deduced. Of course, this does not amount to
empirical evidence supporting a claim of overpatenting. The EPO and the Organi-
zation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) are working on
monitoring instruments for nanotechnology patents (Hullmann and Frycek,
2007a, pp. 11–12). These may begin to enlighten us on the empirical aspects of
patenting in the ﬁeld of nanotechnology. Nevertheless, the risk of overpatenting in
the context of nanotechnology is signiﬁcant enough to contemplate measures to
address the situation.

Addressing the Friction Between Nanotechnology and the Patent System

Above we have seen that there are multiple reasons for fearing that frictions
between nanotechnology and the patent system prevent the former from realizing
its full potential. Hereinafter, a number of avenues are investigated for redressing
this situation.

Person Skilled in the Art
The deﬁnition of the person skilled in the art is highly relevant for the determination
of novelty, inventive step and sufﬁciency of disclosure. If the person skilled in the
art is taken to be highly qualiﬁed it is more difﬁcult to meet the inventive step
requirement, but the disclosure of the invention can be somewhat less encompass-
ing. The person skilled in the art can be assumed to be more adept in applying the

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

65

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

technical teaching of the patent. The opposite also holds: deﬁning the person skilled
in the art as less highly qualiﬁed makes it easier to meet the inventive step hurdle,
but obliges a more encompassing enabling disclosure. In a new ﬁeld, such as
nanotechnology, it is unclear how the person skilled in the art of nanotechnology is
to be deﬁned.

The interdisciplinary character of nanotechnology has a bearing on the deﬁni-
tion of person skilled in the art of nanotechnology. For example, the inter-
disciplinary character may mean that the person skilled in the art should be a
master of many disciplines. This leaves open the question what disciplines he should
master. The function of the concept points the way: with the help of the ﬁctitious
person skilled in the art, it must be possible to determine what activity would be
considered normal progress in the art and what would be considered to be a major
step in the pertinent technology. So, the person skilled in art should reﬂect the
realities in the relevant industry, in this case, the pertinent branch in the nanotech
industry. This indeed means that multidisciplinary talents must be attributed to the
person skilled in the art. Apart from the abstract question of how to deﬁne the
person skilled in the art, there is the practical issue that the concrete capabilities of
patent examiners may rub off on their perception of the person skilled in the art. In
other words, the monodisciplinary restrictions in the capabilities of examiners may
inﬂuence their perception of the person skilled in the art. Thus, a tendency towards
a lightly qualiﬁed person skilled in the art may result, where even the lightness of
qualiﬁcation may be different between patent examiners. An examiner may be more
inclined to view aspects of an invention as inventive if they are in technology
domains with which he is less familiar. Being less adept in reading a patent in such
technology domains an examiner may also require a further elaborated disclosure.
This effectively comes down to having a less highly qualiﬁed person skilled in the art
as the criterion. It could be objected that it is not the patent examiner, but the
courts, that have the last say on what constitutes a person skilled in the art.
Nevertheless, the determinations of a patent examiner are relevant, since most
patents are never litigated. Nanotechnology litigation is still sparse. It will probably
only take off when products are placed on the market on a large scale. Where
patents are litigated, the patent examiner sets the scene for the judgements of the
court. For the time being, there will be variation in the actual standards used in
nanotechnology patenting.

Patent applicants may try to use the interdisciplinary character of nano-
technology to their own advantage by engaging in what I call ‘‘technology shopping’’.
A nanotech patent may, for example, concern a biological switch. The invention
could arguably be dealt with as an electronics invention, but alternatively as a
biotechnological invention. By adequately formulating the claims in terms of a
certain ‘‘participating’’ discipline the patent applicant may try to steer the patent
examiner away from relevant prior art. In the same way, it may also be possible
to select the standards applicable to the determination of the person skilled in the
art, and, in its wake, novelty, inventive step or sufﬁciency of disclosure, since those

66

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

differ to a larger or smaller extent between disciplines. For inventions in the ﬁeld of
biotechnology, research is usually done by postdoctoral researchers. The person
skilled in biotechnology is accordingly more highly qualiﬁed than in most other
arts (Hacon and Pagenberg, 2008, p. 51). The TBA has deﬁned the person skilled in
the art rather wide (T0387/94, Max-Planck-Gesellschaft/Monsanto):
‘‘His/Her
attitude is considered to be conservative. ‘‘He/She would never go against an
established prejudice, nor try to enter unpredictable areas nor take uncalculable
risks’’ ’’. If an invention lends itself to a choice of art, a patent attorney in the above
example may arguably be able to choose between the lower threshold for inven-
tiveness in electronics or a more succinct disclosure in biotechnology. Therefore, it
is worthwhile for patent attorneys to select conscientiously a—favourable—base
discipline.

A team approach to a person skilled in the art may solve some of the inherent
problems associated with the interdisciplinary nature of nanotech inventions.
Dependent upon the implementation of a team approach, there are different effects.
The selection of an implementation therefore calls for a balancing of the effects.
One of the implementation decisions to be made involves the qualiﬁcation of the
team skilled in the art, which may be chosen higher or lower. If the imaginary team
is chosen to be a very well qualiﬁed team, this may raise the bar of inventiveness for
nanotech inventions and may make the disclosures difﬁcult to comprehend for any
individual trying to make sense of a nanotechnology patent. After all, the drafter of
the patent (probably a real life team) may presuppose all the knowledge available in
the imaginary team. It may be contended that this is of limited relevance because
any actor involved in nanotechnology works within multidisciplinary teams.
However, with a view to openness and accountability to the ‘‘outside world’’,
better readability of patents is relevant and requiring that an individual be able to
read and understand a patent does not seem to be a too exaggerated demand.
Therefore, I tend to think that the imaginary individual partaking in the team
should be chosen as being somewhat less qualiﬁed than the person skilled in the art
relevant for monodisciplinary inventions. This will force somewhat more elaborate
disclosures in interdisciplinary inventions.

Another way to get ‘‘better’’ disclosures would be to decouple the inventive-
ness–person skilled in the art from the sufﬁcient-disclosure–person skilled in the art.
This would be a more principled intervention in patent law that would require
further research and for the time being nanotechnology does not present us with the
necessity to do so.15

Deﬁning the person skilled in the art as a team, and backing this up by making
real life interdisciplinary teams, comes quite some way in resolving a possible
technology shopping problem. A team of examiners is harder to fool than an
individual examiner. At the same time, it must be admitted that a multidisciplinary
team of examiners does not solve all problems. After all, it is still unclear how to
determine the default discipline of an invention, or, to say it in other words, what
standards to use when examining nanotech patents.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

67

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Novelty and Inventive Step
As a new technological ﬁeld, there is relatively little prior art and even less prior art
explicitly relating to nanotechnology (Zekos, 2006a, p. 366). A small reservoir of
prior art may have the effect of lowering the actual novelty threshold because
novelty is easy to establish. Possibly, this gives rise to broad patents because the
formulation of the claims does not have to steer clear from much prior art. The
issue of the broadness of nanotechnology patents gains extra weight in view of the
fact that nanotechnology is in its formative stages of development. The progress
made in this stage may yield building blocks on which many later applications will
be founded. On the one hand, the broadness of patents now granted may affect
follow-on innovators negatively. On the other hand, broad patents may be
necessary to recoup the large investment needed for developing laboratory ﬁndings
into marketable products (Lemley, 2005, pp. 628–9). Whether broad patents in
nanotechnology are at the moment a good or a bad thing is open for discussion.
Nevertheless, there can be little discussion that overbroad patents caused by
lacking quality of the work of patent examiners must be avoided. An adequate
determination of the state of the art is central to the quality of a patent examiner’s
work. Although it is the patent applicant that must indicate what the nearest state
of the art is, it is up to the patent ofﬁce to detect any deﬁciencies. This may be an
extra heavy burden in the case of nanotechnology, since it is an emergent
technology and patent ofﬁces struggle to ﬁnd qualiﬁed examiners. The workload
of the present examiners is already very high (Barraclough, 2007; Krempl, 2006). In
order to ease their workload, patent ofﬁces could invest in qualiﬁed examiners and
in optimizing the availability of prior art information, such as technical informa-
tion in academic journals and other non-patent information. Another avenue
through which progress could be booked is by working on a standard terminology
and metrology in nanotechnology. This is, of course, not the task of patent ofﬁces
but that of standard-setting organizations, such as the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) and the American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM International). First standards on nanotech terminology have already been
adopted (ASTM International, 2006; ISO, 2008) or are in the process of being
developed (ASTM International, 2009). ISO standard TS 27687:2008 on terminol-
ogy and deﬁnitions for nano-objects was adopted in 2005 and is the ﬁrst in a
planned series of ISO standards covering terminology and deﬁnitions for various
aspects of nanotechnology. In 2007, the OECD set up a Working Party on
Nanotechnology. It explicitly addresses the issue of standardization in nano-
technology (OECD, 2008). However, the work of standard-setting organizations
often progresses slowly. A technology may not be developed enough to know what
standards concerning semantics, measurement and testing are needed. This seems
to be the case with respect to nanotechnology. Terminology in nanotechnology
literature is extremely dynamic (Hullmann and Frycek, 2007b, p. 396). Obviously,
it is desirable for patent ofﬁces to work with standards that have been set by
standard-setting organizations, especially if they are adopted globally. That makes

68

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

communication with patent applicants easier. Internal communication between the
various divisions within a patent ofﬁce would beneﬁt as well. It makes it also easier
to detect prior art in patent databases and other literature sources. It may help in
clarifying ambiguities in patent claims, making the scope of patents clearer, both
for patentees and third parties such as competitors and licensees. Given the interest
that standards on terminology and metrology represent for the patent system, it
seems to me that an argument could be made for active participation of patent
ofﬁces in standard-setting procedures. On the one hand, patent ofﬁces have an
important role in the patent system as gatekeepers for the patentability of
nanotechnology inventions. In fulﬁlling this role, they are highly dependent on a
uniform terminology and metrology in nanotechnology. Differences in terminol-
ogy and metrology can have far-reaching implications, ultimately that patents are
granted that should not have been granted in the ﬁrst place. Patent ofﬁces should
therefore make sure that their standardization needs are taken into consideration.
On the other hand, patent ofﬁces, being in the unique position they are in, see many
applications from various domains of nanotechnology and, thus, could deliver an
important contribution to the standardization process. In short, there is good
reason to have patent ofﬁces participating in standard-setting processes concerning
terminology and metrology.

Industrial Applicability
In situations of technological change, such as with emerging technologies, there is a
certain risk that broad patents are being granted on enabling technology. This has
possibly been the case in biotechnology where patents have been granted on
upstream research results (Heller and Eisenberg, 1998; Zekos, 2006b). Theoreti-
cally, the requirement of industrial applicability could be used as a brake on
overbroad, upstream research patents that are far removed from a product that
could be placed on the market. Given their abstract character, they may have no
‘‘practical’’ application. In reality, however, the EPO hardly uses the industrial
applicability requirement for this purpose (EPO, 2006, pp. 170–1).

In the ﬁeld of biotechnology, efforts have been made to use industrial
applicability for just that purpose. The European directive on biotechnological
inventions (directive 98/44/EC), article 5(3) indicates that the industrial application
of a sequence or a partial sequence of a gene must be disclosed in the patent
application. It is not quite clear how this provision must be interpreted. One option
is to see it as a mere repetition of the general patentability requirement of industrial
applicability. This interpretation does at ﬁrst seem less likely since it would be
non-sensical: it does not add anything to the normal application of the require-
ment of industrial applicability. The other interpretation implies that a gene patent
should be a purpose-bound patent, that is, it only confers an exclusive right to
use the gene for the purpose stated in the patent claims. The latter interpre-
tation would make for speciﬁc law for gene patents. In 2005, the European

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

69

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Commission evaluated the effect of article 5(3) of the directive.16 The commission
indicated that:

as a speciﬁc ﬁeld of technology becomes mature, the application of the
normal patent criteria of novelty, inventive step and industrial applicability
means that future patents are necessarily limited in scope because the
invention claimed has to be distinguished from the vast array of what
is already known in the ﬁeld[11]. As it is now seventeen years since a
Directive was ﬁrst proposed, it may be questionable whether attempting to
further reﬁne the scope of protection of gene sequence patents in the light
of divergences between national legislations will have any signiﬁcant effect
on actors in the ﬁeld (European Commission, 2005).

The Commission indicates that in relatively short time this piece of special
legislation—if at least it is to be interpreted as such—has made itself superﬂuous.
Apparently, purpose-bound patents do not give patentees an effective protection.
Patents would become too narrow. What implications does this have for the
desirability of speciﬁc rules for the industrial applicability of nanotechnology
patents? It is likely that also in the case of nanotechnology patents the issuing of
overbroad patents—if at all—is a problem associated with the initial stages of
development of the technology. The lack of scientiﬁc knowledge and prior art in
general makes it difﬁcult to draw a line between broad and overbroad protection.
Any attempt at a solution of what seems to be a recurring problem with any new
technology will be handicapped by the same lack of scientiﬁc insight in the nascent
technology and therefore difﬁcult to implement. The slowly growing scientiﬁc insight
in the technology seems rather to point to a solution later in the technology life cycle.
Opening up possibilities for revocation of an overbroad patent ‘‘later on’’ would be a
more natural intervention. Opposition against a ‘‘European patent’’ is, however,
limited to just 9 months after the grant. In this respect, the advent of a centralized
court system would be a welcome development. The European Commission has only
in March 2009 requested a mandate from the European Council to negotiate a treaty
on the so-called Uniﬁed Patent Litigation System which would create such a court
(European Commission, 2009). The actual establishment of the court will probably
only take place after many years. Lack of industrial applicability is, however, an
unlikely ground for invalidating patents later on. Often upstream research results
can be very close to practical applications. With the passing of time, only more
applications for the invention will become apparent. Lack of novelty and inventive-
ness seem more likely candidates. With time, the understanding of a technology will
grow, the technical terminology will become more harmonized, and accessibility and
overview of the technical literature will become better. These circumstances may
cause a different assessment of novelty and inventiveness ex post and be a ground for
invalidating patents that should not have been granted in the ﬁrst place. Invalida-
tions later in a patent’s lifecycle do, however, run the risk of lessening legal certainty
with respect to the validity of granted patents and must therefore be used with care.

70

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

In conclusion,

industrial applicability does not seem to be a particularly
suitable candidate for keeping patents in nanotechnology at bay. Many patents
concern matter that can be used to build practical applications and are often
industrially applicable by their nature.

Conclusion

According to the European Commission, Europe is not good at transforming
nanotechnology research into marketable applications (European Commission,
2004, p. 7). Thus, while the numbers show that nanotechnology-based patents have
not reached the high volumes some would have hoped for, patent law is not to
blame (Kinsler, 2006). It offers enough room to patent nanotechnological inven-
tions. The possibilities for patenting nanotech inventions should be considered
positive.

At the same time, nanotechnology has a number of characteristics that raise the
risk of over-patenting, such as patents on building blocks of the technology and
overlapping patents through inconsistent use of terminology. In this article, it is
argued that such concerns should be addressed. A number of avenues have been
identiﬁed for improving the application of the patent law, speciﬁcally as it relates to
the inherent nuances of nanotechnology inventions. A person skilled in the art of
nanotechnology should be chosen, for example, as a team of not too highly qualiﬁed
workers in the partaking technologies. Furthermore, patent ofﬁces should closely
follow work in standardization of terminology and metrology in nanotechnology
and, if possible, they should participate in standard-setting processes. For now, a
focus on the quality of issued patents as a means to address over-patenting is timely.
Nanotechnology is still at an early stage of research and patenting. Products
are only trickling onto the market. At a later stage when applications of nano-
technology are being developed, ways of facilitating the licensing of nanotechnology
will also become a relevant instrument for dealing with innovation in a ﬁeld where
many and broad patents exist.

About the Author

Maurice H. M. Schellekens, M.Sc., J.D., LL.M., Tilburg Institute for Laws
Technology and Society, Tilburg University; e-mail: m.h.m.schellekens@uvt.nl

Notes

1 T0547/99—Orica Australia/BASF [online]. Available at hhttp://legal.european-patent-

ofﬁce.org/dg3/pdf/t990547eu1.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

2 T0552/00—Smithkline Beecham Biologicals/Wyeth, Reason 20 [online]. Available at hhttp://

legal.european-patent-ofﬁce.org/dg3/pdf/t000552eu1.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

3 T0006/02—Celanese Acetate/Rhodia Acetow [online]. Available at

european-patent-ofﬁce.org/dg3/pdf/t020006eu1.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

hhttp://legal.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

71

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

4 T0206/83, ICI, EPO Ofﬁcial Journal, 1987, 005. For US Patent law, see 158 USPQ 596

(CCPA 1968) In re Hoeksema.

5 An exception to this is of course the ﬁrst medical indication (see article 54(5) of the
EPC) where a purpose-bound product claim based on a novel medical use is allowed,
even though the product (substance) itself is not novel anymore. This exception
is widened in the EPC 2000 to second medical indications. Where previously a Swiss-
type claim was needed, under EPC 2000 a narrow purpose-bound product claim can
be used.

6 See also decision T12/81 BAYER/Diastereomers (1979–85) EPOR Vol B 308 (at 312).
7 T0070/99—Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania/Affymetrix [online]. Available at
hhttp://legal.european-patent-ofﬁce.org/dg3/pdf/t990070eu1.pdfi [Accessed September
2008].

8 T0268/96—AT&T [online]. Available at hhttp://legal.european-patent-ofﬁce.org/dg3/

pdf/t960268eu1.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

9 According to the patent under consideration, an oxide layer is formed by simply
exposing the substrate to air. This native oxide is at most 10 nm thick, that is, several
tens of atom layers thick. The patterning of the native oxide layer is carried out using
irradiating ions on selected areas of the oxide. The irradiated areas are damaged which
make them more susceptible to etching. After the etching step, only the native oxide that
was not irradiated remains and the substrate is exposed in the selected areas.

10 Brenner v Manson 383 US 519 (1966).
11 T0409/91—Exxon [online]. Available at hhttp://legal.european-patent-ofﬁce.org/dg3/

pdf/t910409ex1.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

12 T0487/03—PALM Microlaser-Technologie/Leica Microsystems, Entscheidungsgrund

2.3 [online]. Available at hhttp://legal.european-patent-ofﬁce.org/dg3/pdf/
t030487du1.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

13 The original German text: Die von der Beschwerdef ¨uhrerin genannte Stelle in den

Richtlinien D V 4.3. besagt, da der Patentinhaberin die Beweislast f ¨ur die
Ausf ¨uhrbarkeit der Erﬁndung obliegt, falls die Einspruchsabteilung ernsthaft an ihr
zweifelt [z. B. wenn die Einsprechende sie mit Versuchen belegt].

14 The EPO has taken measures to prevent this from happening.
15 See T60/89, Ofﬁcial Journal 1992, 268, T694/92, T187/93 and T412/93.
16 See article 16b of directive 98/44/EC.

References

Action Group on Erosion, Technology and Concentration (2005) Nanotech’s ‘Second Nature’

Patents: Implications for the Global South [online]. Action Group on Erosion,
Technology and Concentration. Available at hhttp://www.etcgroup.org/en/materials/
publications.html?pub_id=54i [Accessed May 2008].

Almeling, D. S. (2004) ‘Note: Patenting Nanotechnology: Problems with the Utility

Requirement’, Stanford Technology Law Review, N1.

American Society for Testing and Materials (2006) ASTM E2456-06 Standard terminology

Relating to Nanotechnology. Doi 10.1520/E2456-06.

72

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

American Society for Testing and Materials (2009) ASTM WK8051—New Standard

Terminology for Nanotechnology [online]. Available at hhttp://www.astm.org/
DATABASE.CART/WORKITEMS/WK8051.htmi [Accessed April 2009].

Axford, L. A. (2006) ‘Patent Drafting Considerations for Nanotechnology Inventions’,

Nanotechnology Law and Business, 3(3), 305–8.

Ball, Ph. (2005) ‘Putting the Nano into Nanochemistry’, Chemistry World [online]. Available

at hhttp://www.rsc.org/chemistryworld/Issues/2005/December/nano.aspi [Accessed
January 2009].

Baluch, A. S., Radomsky, L. and Maebius, S. B. (2005) ‘In Re Kumar: The First Nanotech

Patent Case in the Federal Circuit’, Nanotechnology Law and Business, 2(4), 342–6.

Baluch, A. S., Wilson, B. and Miller, J. C. (2008) ‘Patenting Graphene: Opportunities and

Challenges’, Nanotechnology Law and Business, 5(3), 289–300.

Barraclough, E. (2007) ‘Examiners Issue Patent Quality Warning’, Managing Intellectual
Property [online]. Available at hhttp://new.managingip.com/Article.aspx?ArticleID=
1329577i [Accessed April 2009].

Barton, J. H. (1997) ‘Patents and Antitrust: A Rethinking in Light of Patent Breadth and

Sequential Innovation’, Antitrust Law Journal, 65(2), 449–66.

Benkard, G. and Asendorf, C. D. (2006) Patentgesetz, Gebrauchsmustergesetz. Beck’sche

Kurz-Kommentare, M ¨unchen.

Boldrin, M. and Levine, D. (2002) ‘The Case Against Intellectual Property’, American

Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, 92, 209–12.

Borisenko, V. E. and Ossicini, S. (2008) What is What in the Nanoworld. A Handbook on

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim.

Dixon, M. (2004) ‘European Patent Review’, Nanotechnology Law and Business, 1(1), 100–3.
Dunens, O. M., MacKenzie, K. J., See, C. H. and Harris, A. T. (2008) ‘Inconsistencies in the

Carbon Nanotube Patent Space: A Scientiﬁc Perspective’, Nanotechnology Law and
Business, 1, 25–40.

European Commission (2004) Towards an European Strategy for Nanotechnology [online].

Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg. Available
at hhttp://ec.europa.eu/research/industrial_technologies/pdf/nanotechnology_
communication_en.pdfi [Accessed May 2008].

European Commission (2005) Report from the Commission to the Council and the European
Parliament—Development and Implications of Patent Law in the Field of Biotechnology
and Genetic Engineering [online], SEC (2005) 943, COM/2005/0312 ﬁnal, Ofﬁcial Journal
C211 of 30 August. Available at hhttp://europa.eu/scadplus/leg/en/lvb/l26026b.htmi
[Accessed May 2008].

European Commission (2009) Recommendation from the Commission to the Council to
Authorise the Commission to Open Negotiations for the Adoption of an Agreement
Creating a Uniﬁed Patent Litigation System [online], SEC (2009) 330 ﬁnal, 20 March.
Available at hhttp://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/indprop/docs/patent/recommendation_
sec09-330_en.pdfi [Accessed April 2009].

European Group on Ethics (2007) Opinion on the Ethical Aspects of Nanomedicine [online],

Opinion No. 21, 17 January [online]. Available at hhttp://ec.europa.eu/
european_group_ethics/activities/docs/opinion_21_nano_en.pdfi [Accessed May 2008].

European Patent Ofﬁce (2006) Case Law of the Boards of Appeal of the European Patent

Ofﬁce [online], 5th edition, December 2006. Available at hhttp://www.epo.org/about-us/
publications/procedure/case-law.htmli [Accessed May 2008].

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

73

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

European Patent Ofﬁce (2009) Nanotechnology in European Patents—Challenge and

Opportunity [online]. Available at hhttp://www.epo.org/focus/issues/nanotechnology.
htmli [Accessed May 2008].

Forman, J. A. (2002) ‘A Timing Perspective on the Utility Requirement in Biotechnology

Patent Applications’, Albany Law Journal of Science and Technology, 12, 647–82.

Gerhardt, P., L ¨ofﬂer, S. and Homann, K. H. (1987) ‘Polyhedral Carbon Ions in

Hydrocarbon Flames’, Chemical Physics Letters, 137(4), 306–10.

Germinario, C. (2006) ‘From Biotech to Nanotech Inventions—Effective Patenting

Strategies’, Bioprocessing and Biopartnering, 54–8.

Hacon, R. and Pagenberg, J. (eds) (2008) Concise European Patent Law, 2nd edition. Kluwer

Law International, Dordrecht.

Harris, D. L. and Bawa, R. (2007) ‘The Carbon Nanotube Patent Landscape in

Nanomedicine: An Expert Opinion’, Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Patents, 17(9),
1165–74.

Heller, M. A. and Eisenberg, R. (1998) ‘Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in

Biomedical Research’, Science, 280(5364), 698–701.

Hullmann, A. (2006) The Economic Development of Nanotechnology—An Indicators Based

Analysis [online]. European Commission, DG Research, 28 November. Available at
hftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/nanotechnology/docs/nanoarticle_hullmann_nov2006.
pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

Hullmann, A. and Frycek, R. (2007a) ‘IPR in Nanotechnology—Lessons from Experiences
Worldwide’ [online]. Proceedings of the workshop in the frame of the INC3 conference
of 16 April, version 2 May. Available at hftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/
nanotechnology/docs/iprworkshop_proceedings_02052007en.pdfi [Accessed May
2008].

Hullmann, A. and Frycek, R. (2007b) Results from the International Workshop ‘IPR in

Nanotechnology—Lessons from Experiences Worldwide’ [online]. World Patent
Information 29, 395–398. Available at hhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wpi.2007.07.006i
[Accessed April 2009].

International Organization for Standardization (2008) ISO/TS 27687:2008, ‘Nano-
technologies —Terminology and Deﬁnitions for Nano-Objects—Nanoparticle,
Nanoﬁbre and Nanoplate.’

Kallinger, Chr. (2007) ‘Nanotechnology patents at the European Patent Ofﬁce’, in ‘IPR in
Nanotechnology: Lessons from Experiences Worldwide’, proceedings of a conference
held in Brussels, 16 April [online]. Available at hftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/
nanotechnology/docs/iprworkshop_kallinger_en.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

Kanama, D. (2006) ‘Patent Application Trends in the Field of Nanotechnology’, NISTEP’s
Science & Technology Trends—Quarterly Review [online], 21, 77–88. Available at hhttp://
www.nistep.go.jp/achiev/ftx/eng/stfc/stt021e/qr21pdf/STTqr2105.pdfi [Accessed July
2007].

Kinsler, M. (2006) ‘Is Europe up to Speed on Nanotechnology?’, Electronicsweekly.com

[online], 13 November. Available at hhttp://www.electronicsweekly.com/Articles/2006/
11/13/40124/Is+Europe+up+to+speed+on+nanotechnology.htmi [Accessed May
2008].

Krempl, S. (2006) ‘Neue Streikwelle beim Europaischen Patentamt’, HeiseOnline [online].
Available at hhttp://www.heise.de/newsticker/meldung/79999i [Accessed April 2009].

74

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Maurice Schellekens

Lemley, M. A. (2005) ‘Patenting Nanotechnology’, Stanford Law Review, 58(2), 601–30.
Lemley, M. A. (2008) ‘Are Universities Patent Trolls?’, Fordham Intellectual Property, Media

and Entertainment Law Journal, 18(3), 611–31.

Letham, L. (2005) ‘Legal and Technology Issues Associated with Nanotechnology’, News

from the Bottom, 1–14.

Lux Research (2005) The Nanotech Intellectual Property Landscape [online], Abstract.
Available at hhttp://www.foley.com/ﬁles/tbl_s31Publications/FileUpload137/2655/
SOF_NTS-R-05-002.pdfi [Accessed January 2009].

Meyer, M. (2001) ‘Socio-Economic Research on Nanoscale Science and Technology: A

European Overview and Illustration’, in M. C. Roco and W. S. Bainbridge (eds),
Societal Implications of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, National Science Found.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 278–311.

Michalitsch, R., Kallinger, Chr., Verbandt, Y., Veefkind, V. and Huebner, S. R. (2008) ‘The
Fullerene Patent Landscape in Europe’, Nanotechnology Law and Business, 5(1), 85–92.

Organization on Economic Cooperation and Development (2008) ‘Final report’, in ‘ISO,

IEC, NIST and OECD International Workshop on Documentary Standards for
Measurement and Characterization for Nanotechnologies NIST’ [online], proceedings
of a conference held at Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 26–28 February. Available at hhttp://
www.standardsinfo.net/info/livelink/fetch/2000/148478/7746082/assets/ﬁnal_report.
pdfi [Accessed April 2009].

Paredes, J. P. (2006) ‘Written Description Requirement in Nanotechnology: Clearing a

Patent Thicket?’, Journal of the Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce Society, 88(6), 489–512.

Pradeep, T. (2007) NANO: The Essentials. Understanding Nanoscience and Nanotechnology.

McGraw-Hill, New York.

Project on Emerging Technologies, The (2009) Consumer Products. An Inventory of

Nanotechnology-Based Consumer Products Currently on the Market [online]. Available at
hhttp://www.nanotechproject.org/inventories/consumer/i [Accessed May 2008].

Sabety, T. (2005) ‘Nanotechnology Innovation and the Patent Thicket: Which IP Policies

Promote Growth?’, Albany Law Journal of Science and Technology, 15, 477–516.

Sanderson, K. (2006) ‘Sharpest Cut from Nanotube Sword: Carbon Nanotech may have
Given Swords of Damascus Their Edge’, NatureNews [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.nature.com/news/2006/061113/full/news061113-11.htmli [Accessed September
2008].

Scheu, M. (2004) ‘Nanotechnology Patents at the EPO’, in ‘International Symposium on

Nanotechnology and Patenting, European Patent Ofﬁce’ [online], proceedings of a
symposium held at The Hague, 9–10 November. Available at hhttp://academy.epo.org/
schedule/2004/_pdf/scheu.pdfi [Accessed on May 2008].

Scheu, M. (2005) Nanotechnology—Interdisciplinary Searching [online], EPO-presentation.
Available at hhttp://www.european-patent-ofﬁce.org/epidos/conf/epic2005/workshops/
pdf/workshop_c_extra_presentation.pdfi [Accessed July 2007].

Schmid, G. (2008) Nanotechnology. Vol. 1: Principles and Fundamentals. Wiley-VCH,

Weinheim.

Scotchmer, S. (1996) ‘Protecting Early Innovators: Should Second Generation Products Be

Patentable?’, Rand Journal of Economics, 27(2), 322–31.

Scott Roe, R. (2006) ‘Nanotechnology: When Making Something Smaller is Non-Obvious’,

Boston University Journal of Science and Technology Law, 12(1), 127–58.

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1

75

Maurice Schellekens

Patenting Nanotechnology in Europe

Shapiro, C. (2001) ‘Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools and

Standard Setting’, in A. B. Jaffe, J. Lerner and S. Stern (eds), Innovation Policy and the
Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 119–50.

Stehr, J., Hrelescu, C., Sperling, R. A., Raschke, G., Wunderlich, M., Nichtl, A., Heindl, D.,
K ¨urzinger, K., Parak, W. J., Klar, T. A. and Feldmann, J. (2008) ‘675-Pos Gold Nano-
Stoves for Microsecond DNA Melting Analysis’, Biophysical Journal, 94(2), 568.

Tullis, T. K. (2008) ‘Current Intellectual Property Issues in Nanotechnology’, Nanoletters,

8(2), 619–23.

Walsh, J. P., Arora, A. and Cohen, W. M. (2003) ‘Research Tool Patenting and Licensing

and Biomedical Innovation’, in W. M. Cohen and S. A. Merrill (eds), Patents in the
Knowledge-Based Economy. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC,
pp. 285–340.

Wang, Y., Wei, F., Luo, G., Yu, H. and Gu, G. (2002) ‘The Large-Scale Production of

Carbon Nanotubes in a Nano-Agglomerate Fluidized-Bed Reactor’, Chemical Physics
Letters [online] 364(5), 568–72. Available at hhttp://www.chemeng.tsinghua.edu.cn/
scholars/wangyao/publication%20and%20patent/The%20large-
scale%20production%20of% 20carbon%20nanotubes%20in%20a%20nano-
agglomerate%20ﬂuidized-bed% 20reactor%20(CPL).pdfi [Accessed April 2009].

Zekos, G. I. (2006a) ‘Nanotechnology and Biotechnology Patents’, International Journal of

Law and Information Technology, 14(3), 310–69.

Zekos, G. I. (2006b) ‘Patenting Abstract Ideas in Nanotechnology’, The Journal of World

Intellectual Property, 9(1), 113–36.

76

r 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2010) Vol. 13, no. 1


