Developments in Encryption Export Controls 

Liberalization at Lust? 

Jeffi-ey L. SNYDER* and James W. REED** 

As  rapidly  as  technology  has  developed  in  the  field  of  high-performance 
computers,  encryption  software  and  commodities,  and  the  world  of  electronic 
commerce-“e-commerce” 
have 
consistently found themselves strugghng to keep pace with developments in the market- 
place. In the latest round of efforts to affect, if not control, developments in this arena, 
on 16 September 1999 the Clinton Administration announced steps designed to relax 
sigdkantly U.S. export controls on encryption software. To many in the community, 
the announcement was as startling as it was stark: 

as  it  has  come  to  be  known-policy-makers 

“Today, the Clinton Administration announced a new approach to encryption policy . . . Any 
encryption commodity or software of any key length can now be exported under a license 
exception  (i.e.  without  a license) after a technical review, to commercial firms and other 
non-governmental  end-users  in  any  country  except  for  the  seven  State  supporters  of 
terrorism.”‘ 
Whde welcome, h s  change is nonetheless perhaps best perceived as a reaction to 
events that have been proceeding largely beyond the control of Administration policy- 
makers. 

The  Clinton  Administration’s efforts  to  balance  the  national  security  and  law 
enforcement  concerns  raised  by  encryption  with 
the  privacy,  security  and 
authentication needs of the new electronic society have, in the eyes of its critics, been 
inadequate. Congress and the courts have become determined participants in this debate 
as  well. While previous efforts in  Congress have yielded little in the way of tangible 
results, the latest version of encryption legislation-the  Security and Freedom through 
Encryption  (SAFE) Act-introduced 
in this session  of Congress, has  drawn significant 
bipartisan support.2 And opponents of existing policy have been celebrating the Ninth 
Circuit’s recent  decision in  Bernstein  v.  United  Stater3  in  which  the  Appellate Court 
affirmed a lower court’s ruling that the Export Administration Regulations R EAR)^ are 
unconstitutional as they relate to export controls on encryption commodities. 

*  Partner at the law firm of Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal, Washington, D.C. 
** Associate at the law firm of Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal, Washington, D.C. 
’ The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Administration  Updater Ennyption Exptl Policy, Fact Sheet, 
2  H.R. 850.106th Cone. (1999). 
3 176 F.3d 1132 (9th CG. i999): 
4  15 C.F.R. §§ 730 et seq. 

16 September 1999. 

978 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

This article reviews these latest changes in export regulations on encryption as well 

as the recently published Bernstein decision. 

I.  DEVELOPMENTS 

ON THE REGULATORY TRACK: A NEW POLICY APPROACH 

To understand why this latest announcement from the Clinton Adrmnistration was 
surprising to many, it is  helpful to  review briefly  some of the latest developments in 
export controls on encryption. While the courts have wrestled with First Amendment 
challenges  to  export  controls  on  encryption  products,  policy-makers  have 
simultaneously struggled  to  maintain  a  delicate  balance  between  other  competing 
interests in this arena-privacy 
and free trade on the one hand, national security and law 
enforcement concerns on the other.  Developments over the past  year have  seen that 
balance shift increasingly in the direction of free traders, in part because of the growing 
availability of strong encryption products from foreign sources.5 

Responding to these pressures from industry sources, the Administration had, up 
until this most recent change, incrementally liberalized export controls on encryption 
products.  While  this  path  toward  liberahzation did  not  always  follow  a  consistent 
approach, two trends in particular were apparent: first, a gradual raising of the threshold 
above  which  encryption  products  have  been  captured  by  export  constraints; and, 
second, an increase in the scope and availabllity of export license exceptions applicable 
to encryption products. 

The  starting point  for  this  trend  toward  liberalized  controls  is  traceable  to  a 
November  1996 decision by  the White  House  to  transfer  control  of all commercial 
cryptography from the State Department to the Commerce Department, a move that 
recogruzed that not all encryption is  “specially designed for military applications”.6 In 
1997, the Commerce Department published regulations designed to give effect to t h s  
new policy, setting a 56-bit  key length as the threshold for controls and establishing a 
new,  multi-faced  EAR category,  labelled  “EI”,  for  export  controls  on  encryption 
commod1ties.7 A prominent theme in these new regulations was official encouragement 
for the  development of  “recoverable products”  that  would  grant federal authorities, 
acting  under  appropriate legal  authorization,  access  to  the  plain  text  of  encrypted 
communications through a “key” held in self-escrow or by a third-party  agent.8 

A June  1999 study  by  the  Cyberspace  Policy  Institute  at  George Washington University has  noted  a 
22  percent  increase  in  foreign-produced  encryption  products  since December  1997.  See Michael Ebert,  Suit 
Threatens U S .  Computer Dominunre, editorial, Journal of Commerce,  16 September 1999, at 8. 

See Executive Order No. 13026, Administration OfExport  Controls on Ennyption Products, 61 Fed. Reg. 58767 
(1996). 
7  In establishing this new “EI” category of controls, the EAR explained that encryption software and hardware 
are “controlled because of this functional capacity to encrypt information on a computer system, and not because 
of any informational or theoretical value that such [commodities] may reflect . . .” 15 C.F.R. 742.15. But some have 
noted that the Bureau  of Export Adminismtion  has  extended encryption controls even to items displaying only 
“dormant encryption” capabitities rather than any true functional capacity. See Chris Epstein, Ewyption’s Regulatory 
Ttdight Zune, 13 The Export Practitioner 13, September 1999. 

For 3 description of the 1997 changes to the Commerce Department regulations governing export controls 
on encryption commodities see Jeffkey L. Snyder, US. Export Controls on Encryption Sofhvre, 1 J.W.I.P. 1, January 
1998, p. 37. 

DEVELOPMENTS IN ENCRYPTION EXPORT CONTROLS 

979 

A significant step in this trend toward relaxation came in September  1998 when 
the White House announced an “updated” policy approach toward export controls on 
encryption.9 In addition to continuing the 56-bit threshold for control on cryptographic 
products, the Administration announced an expansion of the so-called “trusted-sector” 
approach to encryption controls. The White House Press Secretary stated that: 

“The Administration was  strengthening its support for electronic commerce by permitting 
the export of strong encryption when used to protect sensitive financial, health, medical, 
and business proprietary information in electronic form . . . Very strong encryption with any 
key length (with or without key recovery) will  . . . be permitted for export under license 
exception to several industry sectors.”lO 
This revised policy envisioned the creation of a new license exception under which 
strong encryption  products could be exported, following a one-time  technical review 
by  the  Commerce  Department,  to  parties  within  several  defined  sectors-U.S. 
subsidaries, banks and financial institutions, insurance companies, health and mehcal 
institutions  and  on-line  merchants-located  within  a  list  of  forty-six  countries.  In 
adhtion,  the  Admmistration  was  scaling back  its  earlier  emphasis on  key  recovery 
products  and was  drecting that  regulatory requirements requiring  the naming of key 
recovery agents for exports of key recoverable products be deleted. 

In  rolling  out  this  updated  policy,  statements by  senior Administration officials 
made  clear  that  policy-makers  were  keenly  sensitive  to  the  need  to  balance  the 
seemingly irreconcilable competing interests of privacy and trade versus security and law 
enforcement. Vice President Gore commented that: 

“Beginning today, American companies will be able to use encryption programs of unlimited 
strength when  communicating between  most  countries.  Health, medical,  and  insurance 
companies will be  able to use  far  stronger electronic protection for personal records and 
information. Law enforcement will sdll have access to criminally related information under 
strict  and  appropriate  legal  procedures.  And  we  will  maintain  our  111  ability  to  fight 
terrorism and monitor terrorist activity that poses a grave danger to American citizens.”ll 

The Commerce Department was presented the unenviable task  of translating this 
revised policy into workable regulatory guidance for use by the exporting community. 
In December  1998, the Bureau  of Export Administration responded to ths challenge 
by publishing revised regulations that created a new export license exception-called 
an 
ENc--de&cated  exclusively to encryption commo&ties.12 As defined in the December 
1998 regulations, this  new license exception  was  the  sort of tool  that  perhaps could 
appeal  only  to  lawyers;  that  is,  it  was  complex,  confusing,  and  often  inconsistent. 
Broadly  speaking, the  ENC license  exception  was  divided  into  two  parts,  a  global 

9  The Whlte House, Office of the Press Secretary, Administration  Updates Enrrypfion Policy, 16 September 1998. 
10 Id. 
i1  The White House, Statement  by the  Vice Presidenf, 16 September 1998. 
l2  15 C.F.R. 740.17 (1999). See 63 Fed. Reg. 72156, 31  December 1998. The new ENC license exception 
supplemented other  exceptions  for  encryption commodities  that  had  been  created  previously, e.g. KMI (Key 
Management Infhstmcture) and Tsu (Technology and Software Unrestricted). 

980 

THE JOURNAL OF  WORLD INTELLECTUAL. PROPERTY 

category and a country-specific  category, and each part was  further sub-divided into 
several compartments, each with its own set of restrictions. 

Under  this  license exception,  encryption  products  in  the  global  category were 
eligible for  export  to  any  country,  except  the  seven  designated terrorist-supporting 
States  (Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria). This global category 
included non-mass-market  software up to 56-bit key length and software of unlimited 
strength for use by U.S. subsidiaries overseas. As mentioned earlier, the country-specific 
category allowed exports of udmited strength encryption products to forty-six selected 
countries for use within several trusted sectors, which were defined to include banks and 
financial institutions (including insurance companies), health and medical end-users and 
on-line  merchants.  In  every  case,  eligibility to  use  this  new  license exception  was 
contingent upon submitting the encryption product to the Commerce Department for 
a one-time  technical review. 

Despite  this  relaxation  of  controls,  criticism  of  the  Ahnistration’s  approach 
continued  to  grow  both  within  industry and  the  Congress.  To  many,  these  revised 
controls on encryption, though relaxed, remained frustratingly complex, cumbersome, 
and  inconsistent  in  their  application.13 The  expanded  trusted-sector  approach  still 
omitted segments of the industry, most notably telecommunications, that were essential 
to  a  vibrant  electronic commerce.  In  addition,  each  application  of the  new  license 
exception for encryption had certain end-use or retransfer restrictions associated with it, 
some of which produced outcomes that seemed arbitrary or nonsensical. For example, 
under the country-specific use of the license exception, banks and financial institutions 
are permitted to export strong encryption products only to other financial institutions 
in forty-six selected countries. However, they can also export or re-export such strong 
encryption to subsidiaries of those financial institutions in virtually any country (except 
the designated terrorist States).l4 Given this latitude to export or re-export to affiliated 
financial institutions located in any country, many were hard pressed  to understand the 
rationale for initially restricting use  of the license exception to only the forty-six pre- 
approved countries. 

In addition to the restrictions on its use, the new license exception also carried with 
it rather burdensome post-export reporting requirements that for many exporters served 
as a hsincentive  to make use  of it.’5  Stating that “reporting requirements are &fficult, 
and in some cases impossible, for industry to comply with”, in a report released on 25 
August 1999, the President’s Export Council Subcommittee on Encryption (PECSENC), 

‘3  See,  e.g., Aaron  Pressman,  Computer  Industry  Cheers  Relared  Encryption  Rules,  Washington  Post,  16 
September 1999; and John Simons, White House  to Relax  Restrictioris  on  Encryption-Technology Exports.  The Wall 
Street Journal, 16 September 1999. 

l4  15 C.F.R. 740.17(b)(l)(iii)  (1999). 
l i   15 C.F.R. 740.17(d) (1999). Critics also noted that December 1998 changes to the Wassenaar Arrangement 

on encryption controls eliminated all reporting requirements for encryption exports. 

DEVELOPMENTS  IN ENCRYPTION EXPORT  CONTROLS 

981 

a private sector advisory committee to the White House, urged the elimination of all 
reporting requirements for encryption exports not requiring a license.16 

The PECSENC was not reticent about pointing out other aspects of the December 
1998  regulatory  changes  that  it  believed  required  further  improvements.  The 
Committee argued, for example, that the use  of the new license exception should be 
expanded  beyond  the  financial,  medical  and  on-line  merchant  sectors,  and  should 
include critical infiastructure industries, fnendy governments and intergovernmental 
organizations such as  the North  Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the European 
Union and the United Nations. Further, the Committee urged a broadening of the list 
of countries to which strong encryption products could be exported under the license 
exception as  well  as  the removal of certain restrictions on encryption use  by  on-line 
merchants .I7 

It was against this backdrop that the Administration presented its September 1999 
proposals  to  amend  existing  regulations  governing  encryption  exports.  The  policy 
announced by the Admmistration represented not  merely an incremental updating of 
the  regulations  released  in  December  1998;  rather,  it  seemingly  constituted  an 
altogether  new  approach  to  export  controls  on  encryption  products,  one  that 
abandoned entirely the trusted-sector approach adopted only a year earlier. As presented 
by the White House, the new policy contained several new elements:18 

- 

-  Any encryption commodity or software of any key length may be exported 
under  license  exception  (i.e. without  a  license), afier  a  technical review to 
individuals, commercial firms, and other non-governmental end-users in any 
country except for the seven States, supporters of terrorism. 
Any  r e t d  encryption commodities and  s o h a r e  of any key length may  be 
exported under license exception, after a technical review, to any end-user in 
any country, except for the seven States, supporters of terrorism. 
Post-export reporting requirements will be streadned and revised to reflect 
industry business models and distribution channels. 
Industry sector definitions and country-specific lists are eliminated. 

- 

- 

Although  a  comprehensive evaluation necessarily  must  await  publication of the 
Commerce  Department’s implementing regulations, which  are  not  promised before 
15 December  1999, several key points are apparent in this new approach to controls 
on  encryption  commodities.  Gone  are  restrictions based  upon  the  strength  of  the 
encryption algorithm. Gone are narrowly defined industry sectors in which encryption 
products  may  be  exported  without  a  license.  Gone,  too,  are  lists  of  pre-approved 
countries  in  which  non-governmental  end-users  are  eligible  to  receive  strong 

l 6   See  Liberalization  2000: Recommendations for  Revising  Encryption  Regulations,  President’s  Export  Council 
Subcommittee on Encryption (PECSENC), 25 August 1999. See also Industry Council IDS Encryption  Priorities,  13 The 
Export Practitioner 10, September 1999. 
Liberalization  2000, PECSENC, ibid. 
The White House, Administration  Announces New Approach  to Enrryption,  Statement by  the Press Secretary, 

16 September 1999. 

982 

THE  

encryption without a license. Absent entirely are any controls based upon key recovery 
or  recoverable products. Clearly, the  Administration’s new  policy  represented more 
than simply a  lineal extension of the liberalizing trends that had become apparent in 
recent years. 

The Administration, however, remained sensitive to the competing demands of the 
law-enforcement  community  which  had  argued  strenuously  to  preserve  its  court- 
monitored access to the plain-text  of encrypted communications. In response to these 
pressures  and  in  conjunction  with  the  September  1999 liberalization  of  encryption 
controls, the  Administration also  announced  that it would  submit new  legislation to 
Congress, the Cyberspace Electronic Security Act of 1999, that would, in the words of 
the White House: 

“ - Ensure that law enforcement maintains its ability to access decryption information stored 

with third parties, while protecting such information from inappropriate release. 

- Authorize  US$  80  million  over  four  years  to  fund  the  FBI’s  (Federal  Bureau  of 
Investigation) Technical Support Center [to respond] to the increasing use of encryption 
by criminals. 

- Protect  sensitive investigative techniques  and  industry  trade  secrets from  unnecessary 

disclosure in litigation or criminal trials involving encryption . . .”I9 

Initial reaction from both  industry and Capitol Hill to the Administration’s new 
approach, not  surprisingly, was  positive.20  Representative Bob  Goodlatte, a  Virginia 
Republican and a principal co-sponsor  of the SAFE Bill to eliminate export controls on 
encryption, was effusive in his reaction: 

“This is  huge  _.. a  tremendous  victory  for  everybody who  has  been  proposing that  the 
Administration change its export policy on encryption so that we can make it more widely 
available and U.S. companies can compete overseas.”21 
“It’s certainly a heck of a marketing opportunity for us,” commented Art Coviello, 
head  of RSA Security, a company that publishes  a widely used form of encryption.22 
Citing the need to wait for the implementing regulations to be published, others were 
more circumspect in their reaction. “With encryption regulations, the devil is always in 
the details,” noted one privacy-rights group spokesperson.23 

What  prompted  this  “reversal” in  the  Administration’s approach to  encryption 
controls? Several developments undoubtedly forced the  Adrmnistration’s hand.  First, 
domestic political pressures,  emanating principally from  industries in  Silicon Valley, 
clearly played a role, and those voices have grown stronger as it has become increasingly 

l9  Id. 
2o  See  Jen  Clausing,  In  a  Reversal,  White  House  Will  End  Data-Enqption  Export  Curbs,  N.Y.  Times, 
17  September  at  C1;  and  Mark  Wigfield,  Administration  Encryption  Plan  Praised  on  Capital  Hill,  Dow Jones 
Newswires,  16 September 1999. 

21  Clausing, ibid. 
22  Peter  S.  Goodman  and John  Schwartz,  Curbs  on  Export  .f Senecy  Codes  Ending,  Washington Post,  17 
23  See High-Tech’s Advocates Applaud  O&al’s  Enqption Reversal, The Wall Street Journal, 16 September 1999. 

September 1999, p. Al. 

DEVELOPMENTS IN ENCRYPTION EXPORT CONTROLS 

983 

apparent that foreign sources of encryption code are coming to dominate the market. 
Second, law enforcement and national security agencies simply may have acknowledged 
the  emerging reality:  in  an  e-commerce  world  where  transactions  are  increasingly 
secured through encryption software, it would be better that software be based on U.S.- 
origin codes (especially ones to which the agencies wdl continue to have familiarity with 
through  the one-time review process) rather than foreign-produced codes. Lastly, the 
Administration may simply have bowed gracefully to the inevitable, as Representative 
Goodlatte’s SAFE encryption  bill  already  had  garnered two  hundred  and  fifty-eight 
co-sponsors  in  the  House  of  representative^.^^  “The Adrmnistration clearly saw  the 
train coming down the track, and rather than lie down in front of it decided to jump 
on board,” commented one key legislator.25 

Those  who  urge  patience  in  evaluating the  Administration’s new  approach  to 

export controls on encryption products are wise; the devil-if  he is to be found at all- 
undoubtedly will be in the details of the implementing regulations. And many details 
remain to be resolved. What restrictions, for example, will remain attached to the use 
of this newly broadened license exception for encryption commodties? How exactly 
will  “retail  encryption  products”  be  defined?  Will  the  “streamlined”  reporting 
requirements really be less burdensome than in the past? However these questions may 
ultimately be answered, it seems clear that the Administration has signalled an intent to 
move in a different drection with respect to controls on encryption products. 

Unfortunately  for  the  Administration,  developments  in  export  controls  on 
encryption have moved along at least two parallel tracks, and the other track is one over 
which the Administration has decidedly less control. 

11.  DEVELOPMENTS 

ON THE JUDICIAL TRACK: BERNSTEIN  IV 

The  Ninth  Circuit’s  invalidation  of  the  Export  Administration  Regulations’ 
controls  on  encryption  software  occurred  in June  1999, months  before  the  recent 
liberahation. While many aspects of this latest policy announcement remain unclear, 
one point  is  clear:  controls on the  export of encryption source codes have not  been 
eliminated entirely. 

Bernstein is but one of at least three lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of the 
encryption controls.26 The basic theory in each case is the same: encryption software is 
a form of speech, and under the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, “Congress 
shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech.” The courts have split on t h s  issue, 
creating a number of important legal issues. 

24  See Administration  Reversa Encryption Policy, Washington Trade Daily, 17 September 1999. 
25  Ibid., at 8, quoting Rep. Richard h e y  (R-Tex.). 
2h  The three cses all  involve challenges to the  constitutionality of the  export controls on  encryption. See 
generally Thinh Nguyen, Note: Cryptography, Export Controls, and the First Amendment in Bernstein  v. U.S. Department 
$State,  10 Haw. J. Law & Tech. 667,  1997; Laura  Pilkington,  Comment: First and  F$h  Amendment  Challenges to 
Export  Controls: Bernstein  and  Karn, 37 Santa Clara L. Rev.  159, 1996; M. Froomkin, The Metaphor  is  the  Key: 
Cryptography, the  Clipper Chip, and the  Constitution, 143 U. Penn., L. Rev. 709, 1995. 

984 

THE  

A.  The Origin of 

the Bernstein Case 

When Daniel Bernstein initiated his  challenge to the controls on encryption, he 
was a graduate student in the mathematics department at the University of California at 
Berkeley, working in the field of cryptography. He is now a professor at the University 
of  Illinois at  Chicago. Professor Bernstein  developed  an  encryption algorithm called 
“snuffle”,  which  he  describes  as  a  “zero-delay  private-key  encryption  system”.27 
Bernstein  has  also  published  a  paper,  “The  Snuffle  Encryption  System”,  and  has 
generated  source  code  in  the  C  programming  language,  for  both  encryption  and 
decryption, with English-language instructions for the source code. Desiring to transfer 
some of his  encryption source code overseas, Mr Bernstein sought clarification of the 
export control status of his work from the U.S. government. In response to Bernstein’s 
inquiry, the Department of State determined that the source code was  controlled as a 
“defense  article”  and,  therefore,  the  export  of  that  code  was  restricted  under  the 
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR).~~ 

Mr Bernstein then  sued the Department  of State, arguing that  the  ITAR’S export 
controls violated his rights under the First Amendment because they limited his ability 
to  teach, publish  and share his  theories  on  cryptography.29  In April  1996, the  Court 
determined that  encryption  source  code  was,  in  fact,  speech protected  by  the  First 
Amendment.30 On 9 December 1996, the Court found that the ITAR did indeed violate 
Bernstein’s First Amendment rights31 because the ITAR’S 
licensing requirements imposed 
an unconstitutional prior restraint on free speech.32 

On  31  December  1996,  shortly  after  the  Court’s  decision, jurisdiction  over 
encryption shifted from the Department of State to the Commerce Department.33 The 
Court was then asked to consider whether, in the light of the transfer and in the way in 
which  encryption  was  controlled  under  the  Commerce  Department’s  Export 
Administration  Regulations,  the  controls remained  unconstitutional. On 25  August 
1997, Judge Patel concluded that the EAR controls on encryption did, in fact, impose 
an unconstitutional prior restraint on free speech in violation of the First Amendment.34 
Judge Patel declared: 

“The Export Administration Regulations,  15 C.F.R. Part 730 et  seq.  (1997) and all rules, 
policies and practices promulgated or pursued thereunder insofar as they apply to or require 
licensing for encryption and decryption software and related devices and technology are in 
violation of  the  First  Amendment  on  the  grounds  of prior  restraint and  are,  therefore, 
unconstitutional . . . and shall not be applied to plaintiffs publishing of such items, including 
scientific papers, algorithms or computer programs.”35 

27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 

974 F. Supp. 1288 (N.D. Ca  1997); affd, 176 F.3d  1132 (9th Cir. 1999). 
974 F.  Supp., at 1293. 
Bernstein I,  922 F. Supp. 1426 (N.D. Ca. 1996). 
Id. 
Bernstein v.  United States  (Bernstein rr),  945 F. Supp. 1279 (N.D. Ca. 1996). 
Ibid., at 1292. 
61 Fed. Reg. 68572 (1996). 
Bernstein v. United States (Bernstein rrr), 974 F. Supp. 1288, 1310 (N.D. Ca. 
Ibid.. at 1310. 

1997). 

DEVELOPMENTS IN ENCRYPTION EXPORT CONTROLS 

985 

The Court then enjoined enforcement of the Export Administration Act against 
Bernstein or anyone using, discussing, or publishing Bernstein’s “snuffle” source code. 
Enforcement of Judge Patel’s order findmg the law unconstitutional currently is stayed 
on  an  emergency  basis.36  During  the  Court  proceedings,  the  parties  entered  into  a 
stipulation permitting Professor Bernstein to teach his course at the University of Illinois 
under controlled conditions.37 

B.  The Ninth  Circuit 

On appeal, a divided panel of the Ninth Circuit affirmed the lower court’s ruling.38 

The Appellate Court held that the: 

“EAR regulations (1) operate as  a pre-publication  licensing scheme that  burdens scientific 
expression; (2) vest  boundless discretion  in  government  officials; and  (3) lack  adequate 
procedural safeguards. ”39 
The Justice Department has sought rehearing in the case, so no mandate has issued. 
Accordingly, the  injunction  issued  by  the District  Court, which was  stayed pendmg 
appeal, remains in that status pendmg the Ninth Circuit’s decision on the government’s 
petition for a rehearing.40 As  a practical matter, therefore, the E m  remain in place and 
the hll panoply of encryption controls apply.41 

The  Ninth  Circuit  Opinion  was  written  by Judge  Fletcher  with Judge  Bright 
concurring and Judge Nelson dissenting. The split in the Panel arose because the judges 
differed over the appropriate First Amendment analysis to apply to the issue at hand and 
from  a  fundamental dfference  of  opinion  over  the  nature  of  source code.42 Judge 
Nelson, in dissent, argued that the majority failed to recognize that “the basic function 
of encryption source code is to act as a method for controlling computers.’’43 In contrast, 
the majority framed the issue  as  “whether  encryption source code is  ‘expression’ for 
First  Amendment  purposes.”44  Based  on  a  number  of  observations,  the  majority 
concluded that encryption software, in its source code form and as employed by those 

- 

34  The District Court granted a stay on 9 September 1997, and the Ninth Circuit on 22 September 1997. The 
Ninth Circuit established an expedted briefing and argument schedule, indicating that extensions would only be 
manted for “extraordinarv and comoekne circumstances”. Order No. 97-16686.  22 SeDtember 1997. 

37  Stipulationfor TeaLhing During the $ring  Semester, No. 95-0582, 13 Janua;  1997.’ 
38  176 F.3d 1132 (9th Cir. 1999). 
39  Id., at 1135. 
4c  When the Ninth Circuit’s Opinion was handed down in the Bernstein case, the Commerce Department was 
quick to point out to the exporting community that  the injunction had been stayed and that the ruling did not 
extend beyond the Ninth Circuit: see U.S. Department of Commerce, BM  Stafement on Court Decision  in Bernstein 
Case, 1 June 1999. 
41  The stay prevents the Court’s order from taking effect. One complex side-issue  in the case is how to grant 
Bemstein the relief he seeks because the encryption controls are intertwined with other controls on software. On 
appeal, the Ninth Circuit found that the encryption controls were not severable and, therefore, the entire set of 
export control regulations was unconstitutional. It is for this reason, as well as the disappointment with the decision 
on the merits, that the Department ofJustice has sought a rehearing. 

42  At issue in the litigation is only the application of the EAR to Bernstein’s source code and instructions, not 

to object code. 

43  176 F.3d, at 1147. 
44  Ibid., at  1139. 

986 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

in the field of cryptography, must be viewed as expressive speech for First Amendment 
purposes, and thus is  entitled to the protections of the prior-restraint doctrine.45 The 
Court noted that although only trained programmers can understand source code, such 
code  does  express  “cryptographic  ideas  and  algorithms”.  The  Court  continued: 
“Cryptographers use source code to express their scientific ideas in much the same way 
that  mathematicians  use  equations  or  economists use  graphs.”46  It  is  precisely  this 
conclusion that split the Panel. The dissent argued that source code is not expression, 
but  instead is  more  “like conduct than  speech”.47  In  his  dmenting  Opinion, Judge 
Nelson  continued  “While encryption source code  may  occasionally be  used  in  an 
expressive manner, it is inherently a functional device.”48 

The concurring Opinion  of Judge Bright, who  cast  the decidmg vote, is  worth 

quoting in its entirety, because it illustrates this basic split: 

“I join Judge Fletcher’s Opinion.  I  do so because the speech aspects  of encryption source 
code represent communication between computer programmers. I do, however, recognize 
the validity of Judge  Nelson’s view  that encryption  source code also have the functional 
purpose of controlling computers and in that regard do not command protection under the 
First Amendment.  The importance .f this case suggests that it may be appropriate for review by the 
United States Supreme Court.”  (emphasis added) .49 
Given  this  split  on  such  crucial  and  fundamental  issues  affecting  controls  on 
encryption  source  code,  the Justice  Department  sought  a  rehearing  by  the  Ninth 
Circuit, arguing that there is  a  basic  “regulatory distinction between products  that  can 
encrypt data and information about encryption.”  (emphasis in original) .SO  The Ninth Circuit 
Panel  considered  and  rejected  the  government’s  view  of  source  code  as  purely 
functional for two reasons. First, the Court noted that source code, uncompiled, does 
not have the functionality ascribed to it by the government. Second, the Panel rejected 
the government’s assertion that “even one drop of ‘direct functionality’ overwhelms any 
constitutional protections that expression might otherwise enjoy.”51 

Having thus decided that source code is speech for purposes of First Amendment 
analysis,  the  majority  then  applied the  Freedman  v.  Maryland52  test  for  determining 
whether a prior restraint on speech is permissible. The Freedman test requires that: 

“(1) any restraint must be for a specified brief period of time; (2) there must be expeditious 
jucficial review; and (3) the censor must bear the burden  of going to court to suppress the 
speech in question and must bear the burden of prooC”53 

45 Ibid., at  1141. 
46  Id. 
47  Ibid., at 1148. 
48  Id. 
49  Ibid., at 1147, Bright, J., concumng. 
50 Appellant’s Reply to Appellee’s Response to Petition for Panel Rehearing and Rehearing En Banc, at  1. 
51  Ibid., at 1142. 
52  380 U.S.  51 (1965). 
53  176 F.3d, at  1144, citing Freedman,  380 U.S., at 58-60. 

DEVELOPMENTS  IN ENCRYPTION  EXPORT CONTROLS 

987 

The Court ready determined that the export regulations do not meet even one of 

these factors. The Court observed that: 

“Bernstein and other scientists have been effectively chilled &om engaging in valuable sciendic 
expression. Bemstein’s experience itself demonstrates the enormous uncertainty that exists 
over the scope of the regulations and the potential for chding of scientific expre~sion.”~~ 

This led the Court to the conclusion that: 

“. . . because the challenge regulations grant boundless discretion to government officials, and 
because  they  lack the required procedural protection ... we  find that  they  operate as  an 
unconstitutional prior restraint on speech.”55 

Although dicta, the Court also commented on two important issues presented by 
the case.  First, the Court expressed the view that government, in its efforts to restrict 
encryption, “is intentionally retardlng the flourishing science of cryptography.“56 If so, 
and if these efforts are aimed at ideas, then  “these efforts would appear to strike deep 
into the heartland of the First Amendment.”  Second, the Court noted that the EAR not 
only  intiinge the rights  of cryptographers but  also implicate the Fourth  Amendment 
privacy right of all citizens.57  The Court’s Fourth Amendment concerns echo many of 
those seeking to relax encryption export controls for the development of the Internet 
and other communication technologies. The role that encryption plays today has been 
likened to that of an envelope: who wants to send private messages on a postcard? Of 
course,  people  prefer  the  protection  of  a  sealed  envelope,  and  encryption  aims  to 
safeguard, or at least enhance, the privacy of citizens. 

O n  30 September 1999, the Ninth Circuit agreed to the government’s request for 
a rehearing before an eleven-judge panel of the Circuit C0urt.58 As  the Ninth Circuit 
prepares to  rehear the  case  the  issues  that are presented necessarily will be  addressed 
against the  backdrop  of the latest  liberalization of  export  controls  on  encryption.  It 
seems clear, however,  that  the  central issue in  Bernstein-xport 
controls  on source 
code-is 
not  affected by  the  most  recent  announcement  from  the  White  House. 
Statements  issued  by  the  Commerce  Department  designed  to  explain  the  newly 
announced policy support this conclusion: 

“Source code will continue to be reviewed under a case-by-case  basis. This update will allow 
the global export of object code encryption software under a license exception.” (emphasis 
added) .59 
Whatever relief the recent liberahation eventually may offer to exporters, it offers 
nothing  to  Bernstein.  Thus,  it  appears that  whatever  may be  the  result  of the  Ninth 

54  Ibid., at  1145. 
55  Id. 
56  Id. 
57 Ibid., at  1145-1146. 
58 Bob  Egelko,  Court  to  Reconsider  Encryption  Rule,  1  October  1999,  available  at  whttp://www. 
59  U.S. Department  of Commerce,  Update  to  Encryption  Policy, September  1999, Questions and  Answers,  16 
September  1999. The question to which this  statement responded  was: “Is source code allowed to be exported 
under a license exception or does this policy only authorize the export of encryption object code?” 

washingtonpost.com/~-srv/aponline/l999lOOl/aponlineOZ534 1-000.htmn. 

988 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Circuit’s rehearing, the  Supreme Court appears destined to have  the  opportunity to 
review the First Amendment issues raised by Mr Bemstein. 

C.  Other Cases 

Those  watching  Bernstein  are  likewise  following  other  related  cases  in  which 

judicial challenges to the export controls on encryption have been raised. 

In  Kurn  t~. Department  of  Stute,60  contrary to  the  Bernstein  decision,  the  Court 
granted  the  government’s  motion  for  summary  judgment,  finchng  that,  while 
encryption  software  is  in  fact  speech,  the  export  controls  do  not  represent 
unconstitutional prior restraint, but instead are permissible because (1) they hrther the 
“significant  government  interest  of  preventing  the  proliferation  of  cryptographic 
products”, and (2) they are narrowly tadored to meet that interest.61 At issue in Kurn is 
an uncomfortable dichotomy for the U.S. government: printed versus electronic source 
code. In 1994, Bruce Schneier published a book entitled, Applied Cryptography,62 which 
contains source code for cryptographic algorithms. The author also  published those 
same source codes in electronic form in two diskettes that were to be sold as an insert 
with the book. Philip Karn later sought a determination of the export control status of 
the encryption source code in both printed and diskette fom.63 In a  ruling that was 
surprising and perplexing to many, the State Department found that the printed form of 
the code was  not  controlled, but the  code in dskette form was.64  Karn  then sought 
judicial review of the State Department’s decision. 

In decidmg Kurn, Judge h c h e y  applied the O’Brien65 test under First Amendment 
jurisprudence and determined first that the export controls were “content neutral”, and 
hrther  that  the  controls  “further  an  important  governmental  interest”,  and  are 
“narrowly tailored to the  governmental interest”.66 Based  on this test, Judge Richey 
evaluated the claimed interest: 

“. . . the proliferation of cryptographic products will make it easier for foreign intelligence 
targets  to  deny  the  US. Government  access  to  information  vital  to  national  security 
interests.”67 
The decision also  is  coloured sipficantly by Judge Richey’s view that the case 
presents  a  “political  question”  that  is  better  resolved  by  the  other  branches  of 

925 F.  Supp. 1  (D.D.C. 1996). 

61  Ibid., at  10 and  12. 
62  The book has since been revised and updated and is now in a second edition. 
63  925 F.  Supp., at 3 and 4. 
64  Ibid., at 4. This decision was called “utterly moronic”. John Schwartz, Wordsfor  Exports-But  Not Electrons: 
Critics Question  U.S. Restridom on Diskjom Cryptography Book, Washington Post, 15 October 1994, quoting David 
Banisar, Electronic Privacy Information Center. 

65  O’Brien v. United States, 391 U.S. 367 (1968). 
66  Karn, 925 F. Supp., at 10-12. 
6’  Ibid.. at 10. 

DEVELOPMENTS IN ENCRYPTION EXPORT CONTROLS 

989 

government.68 The decision was appealed to the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the 
District  of  Columbia,  but  following  the  transfer  of  jurisdiction  &om  the  State 
Department  to  Commerce  Department,  was  remanded for consideration of the  new 
law.69  On 22 August  1997, the  Commerce Department  issued  its determination that 
under  the  EAR’S new  EI  controls on  encryption  commodities, the  diskette remains 
subject to export controls.70 The case is now pending again at the District Court and, 
following the  death  of Judge  Ritchey, Judge  Oberdorfer  has  recently  scheduled an 
evidentiary hearing in the case. 

Injunger v. Duley,71 a Federal District Court in Ohio barred the plaintiff, Professor 
Peter Junger, a law professor at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, from 
posting  course  materials  containing  encryption  source  code  on  the  Internet.  In 
addressing virtually the  same legal issue that confi-onted the Court in Bernstein, Judge 
James Gwin reached the opposite conclusion. Holdmg that encryption source code was 
not entitled to protection under the First Amendment, the Court noted: 

“Among computer sofhvare programs, encryption  software is  especially  functional rather 
than  expressive. Like  much  computer  sofhvare,  encryption  source  code  is  inherently 
functional; it is designed to enable a computer to do a designated task. Encryption source 
code does not merely explain cryptographic theory or describe how the software functions. 
More than describing encryption, the software carries out the hnction of encryption . . . In 
doing this function, the encryption software is indistinguishable &om dedicated computer 
hardware that does en~ryption.”’~ 
Not  surprisingly, Judge  Nelson’s dissent in  the  Bernstein  Appellate ruling,  cited 
Junger  extensively. Professor Junger has  appealed the lower court’s judgment, and the 
case is currently pendmg before the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. 

Most  observers  believe  that  the  Courts  in  Bernstein,  Kurn  and Junger  have 
adequately fiamed the issues and that once the Appellate process has run its course, the 
First Amendment issues presented in those cases will be ripe for review by the Supreme 
Court. However the Appellate Courts may ultimately decide, clearly these cases present 
a novel and complex legal question that warrants juhcial review at the highest level. 
m.  CONCLUSION 

As  the  market  continues  to  drive  advances  in  e-commerce  technology,  both 
policy-makers  and the courts will struggle to keep pace. Given the hndamental  nature 

68  “This case presents a classic example of how the courts today, particularly the federal courts, can become 
needlessly invoked, whether in the national interest or not, in litigation involving policy decisions made within the 
power of the President or another branch of the government. The plaintiff, in an effort to export a computer disk 
for profit, raises administrative law and meritless constitutional claims because he and others have not been able to 
persuade Congress and the Executive Branch that the technology at issue does not endanger the national security.”: 
ibid., at 2. 

69  U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, Judgment No. 965121.21 January 1997. 
70  Letter &om James A.  Lewis, Director, Office of Strategic Trade and Foreign Policy Controls, Bureau of 
Export Administration, U.S. Depamnent of Commerce, to Kenneth J. Bass, counsel for Mr Karn, 22 August 1997. 
71  8 F.  Supp. 2d 708 (N.D. Ohio 1998). 
72  Ibid., at 716. 

990 

THE  

and  law 
of  the  interests that  are  affected  by  encryption  export  controls-privacy 
enforcement; free trade and national security-it 
is apparent that the search to find the 
appropriate balance  will  continue.  If  the  past  is  any  guide,  it  seems  clear  that  the 
September 1999 announcement from the White House will not  be  the last word in 
export controls on encryption. Nor have the legal issues presented by encryption export 
controls been finally laid to rest in the courts. As the debate continues, both in the courts 
and in the policy-making arena, interested observers are well advised to  be  alert for 
further developments that will affect the future of export controls on encryption. 


