Mid icamen ts sans Fron ti2res ? 

Clarification of the Relationship between TRIPS and 

Public Health resulting from the WTO Doha 

Ministerial Declaration 

Pad VANDOREN* 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

On  14  November  2001,  the  Declaration  on  the  Trade-Related  Aspects  of 
Intellectual Property fights (TRIPS) Agreement and Public Health (see the Annex to 
this  article) was  adopted by  the  one hundred  and forty-two  Members of the World 
Trade  Organization  at  the  Fourth  Ministerial  Conference  in  Doha,  Qatar.  This 
important Declaration was the result of many hours of negotiation at the Conference 
and prior discussion initiated in the Council for TRIPS by the African Group. The value 
of  the  Declaration  lies  in  its  clarification  of  the  relationship  between  the  TRIPS 
Agreement  and  public  health  policies  of  WTO Members  and its  definition  of  the 
flexibility of  several relevant provisions of the  TRIPS Agreement, in  particular with 
regard to patents. In addition, the Declaration is evidence that the TRIPS Agreement is 
not  a  static instrument  laying down  international minimum  standards of protection 
exclusively for the benefit of rightholders based  in  the  developed countries, but  one 
capable of reconciling intellectual property with national policies, such as in the area of 
public health, in particular in developing countries. 

11.  THE NEED FOR A NEW APPROACH IN A NEW ENVIRONMENT 

Since its adoption at the Uruguay Round in 1994, the TRIPS Agreement had been 
criticized  by  developing  countries,  supported  by  a  number  of  non-governmental 
organizations, as being an obstacle to development and to the pursuit of public health 
policies  by  developing  countries.  Discussions  culminated  in  a  debate  on  access  to 
mehcines  at  the  time  when  developing  countries  were  under  the  obligation  to 
implement  the  TRIPS Agreement,  i.e.  as  of  1 January 2000.  In  this  context,  it  was 
alleged that the patent regime imposed by the TRIPS Agreement, and in particular the 
*  Head of Unit for new technologies, intellectual property and public procurement, Directorate-General for 
The views expressed are the author’s own and do not necessarily bind the European Commission. He may be 

Trade, European Commission, Brussels, Belgium. 

contacted at: upaul.vandoren@cec.eu.intr. 

6 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

twenty-year-long protection of rightholders resulting therefrom, was the reason, or one 
of the reasons, for the absence of affordable medicines needed to combat communicable 
diseases in developing countries. 

The European Commission held extensive consultations with all interested parties 
during the course of the year 2000 and addressed the link between intellectual property 
rights  (IPRS) and  the  availability of  affordable  medicines  in  its  Communication  to  the 
Council and  the European Parliament: Accelerated action targeted at major communicable diseases 
within the context ofpoverty reduction,’  as well as the Programme for Action: Accelerated action 
on  HIV/AIDS, malaria  and  tuberculosis  in  the context  ofpoverty  reduction.2  Both  of these 
documents received strong support from the  Council  of Ministers and the European 
Parliament  and  constituted  the  basis  for  the  Communication  by  the  European 
Communities and their Member States3 to the TRIPS Council in June 2001. 

The latter Communication, as well as the Communication initiated by Brazil on behalf 
of a sigdicant number of developing countries,4 set the parameters for the work undertaken 
in the TRIPS Council which, at its April 2001 meeting, had decided to concentrate on the 
interpretation and application of the relevant provisions  of the TRIPS Agreement, with a 
view to clarifjrlng the flexibhty to whxh Members were entitled under the Agreement and 
the relationshp between the TRIPS Agreement and af3ordable access to mehcines.5 

The contents of the future Declaration emerged at the end of an informal meeting 
of the TRIPS Council in July 2001, at which the Chair concluded that “the focus should 
be  on  the  objectives and  principles as  enshrined in  Articles  7  and  8, the  provisions 
relating to compulsory licences and the provisions relating to parallel imports.”6 

The more favourable environment for review of this issue can also be seen in the 
result  of a  dispute settlement case  initiated by  the  United  States against  Brazil at the 
WTO. In that case, the United States initiated a complaint7 questioning the compatibility 
with  the  TRIPS Agreement  of  Article  68  of  Brazil’s  Industrial  Property  Law  (Law 
9.279/96). This Article allows the Brazilian government to grant a compulsory licence 
where there is a lack of local manufacture of the patented product. The United  States 
took the view that this provision infnnged the non-discrimination principle in Article 
27.1 of TRIPS. Brazil, however, took the view that this provision was fully  compliant 
with  TRIPS. In  the  end,  the  U.S.  government  decided to withdraw  the  case  against 
Brazil, undoubtedly due to pressure from public opinion. Thus, rather than pursuing the 
dispute any further, both parties notified a Mutually Agreed Solutions to the WTO on 

’ COM  585-2000. 
COM  96-2001. 
3  IP/C/W/280,  Communicationfrom  the European  Communiries and their Member States-Tke 

provisions of  TRIPS and access to medicines. 

IP/C/W/296. 

5  IP/C/M/30,  page 73, paragraph 251. 
6  J0~(01)119. 
7  WT/DS199/1. 
8  WT/DS199/4. 

relationship between 

MEDICAMENTS  SANS F R O N T I ~ E S ?  

7 

5 July  2001.  In  this  text,  the  United  States  agreed  to  terminate  the  WTO panel 
proceelng without prejuQce in return for Brazil’s commitment to hold prior talks to 
permit  constructive discussion should Brazil deem it necessary  to apply Article 68 to 
grant a compulsory licence on patents held by  U.S. companies. The United States also 
confirmed  in  the  text  that  the  initial  action  had  not  been  directed  at  the  Brazilian 
programme to combat HIV/AIDS, and that they would continue to pursue the shared 
goal of defeating the HIV/AIDS virus. 

Prior to the above case, public opinion and awareness had been raised because of a 
conflict between  the  pharmaceutical industry and  South Ahca. A lawsuit  had  been 
brought  by  thirty-nine  pharmaceutical companies against the  Government  of South 
Africa, challenging the  provisions  of the  Medicines and Related  Substances Control 
Amendment  Act  which  attempted to  balance  patent  protection  against  the  need  to 
provide medicines at an affordable price to those in need. Due in no small part to strong 
domestic and international pressure, the companies withdrew their case in April 2001 
after a settlement was agreed between the parties. 

111.  THE BASIC ISSUE 

Article  8.1 of the  TRIPS Agreement refers  to  a  number  of pertinent  principles 
Members may pursue when implementing the Agreement and explicitly provides that, 
when Members implement TRIPS, they may adopt measures necessary to protect public 
health,  provided  they  are  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  the  Agreement.  The 
question of whether the adoption of such measures would be in compliance with TRIPS 
led  to  a  discussion on  whether  or not  intellectual  property  should  override  health 
concerns. 

This approach is  flawed, however, as it fails  to recognize that protection of these 
rights is  an  essential ingredient in  finding a  response to  public  health  problems.  An 
essential contribution to drugs development is made by private enterprises, who need 
incentives to continue investments in research and development. Intellectual property 
and public  health  can  and  should be  mutually  supportive, because without  effective 
medicines  public  health  policies  would  be  hampered.  The  new  and  innovative 
medicines required for an  effective public health policy wdl not be developed without 
the  necessary research  and  development investments by  the  pharmaceutical industry. 
The investment will not be made unless the innovators obtain adequate protection for 
a reasonable period of time. An obvious example of the real value of IPR protection is 
the  case  of  generic  copies  which  are  only  possible  to  the  extent  that  innovative 
molecules have been developed and made public first. Consequently, a solution wdl not 
be found in denying protection to intellectual property, but rather in ensuring that the 
resulting benefits  are  available  to  all  without  rendering  the  protection  meaningless, 
which is a delicate balance. 

8 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

IV.  CLARIFYING THE RELATIONSHIP 

BETWEEN TRIPS AND PUBLIC HEALTH 

In clarifying the relationship between TRIPS and public health it was important to 
make  a  clear  statement that  intellectual property  protection  should not  be  seen as  a 
barrier to appropriate measures in response to public health concerns. The Declaration 
begins with  the  confirmation by  Ministers that  “the TRIPS Agreement does not  and 
should  not  prevent  Members from  taking  measures  to  protect  public  health.”  This 
statement lays the foundation for the rest of the text, as it gves meaning to the obvious 
principle that a Member’s right (or indeed duty) to pursue public health objectives and 
policies is unaffected by the TRIPS Agreement. 

In addition, the Declaration goes on to affirm that “the TRIPS Agreement can and 
should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of WTO Members’ right 
to protect public health . . .” This statement confirms that, rather than being constrained 
by  the  provisions  of  TRIPS when  implementing their  intellectual  property  regimes, 
Members can, in fact, use  these provisions in a  positive way  to opt for a system  that 
matches their public health objectives. 

Thirdly,  the  Declaration  provides  comfort  to  Members in  the  case  of disputes 
(e.g.  in  the  context  of  WTO dispute  settlement  procedures).  A  Member  whose 
legislation is being challenged by another Member because of alleged incompatibility 
with  the TRIPS Agreement can refer to the contents of this Declaration in support of 
the measures under dispute, where relevant. Although the Declaration was not meant 
to  affect  Members’  rights  and  obligations,  it  expresses  the  Members’  views  and 
intentions, which are important in terms of interpreting the spirit of the application of 
TRIPS provisions,  and  panelists  are  likely  to  take  account  of  this  complementary 
Declaration as well as  the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement  in  their  decisions. By 
making this Declaration, Ministers have brought the intentions expressed in the text 
into  the  context  of  the  TRIPS Agreement  as,  according  to  the  rules  of  treaty 
interpretation,  the  text  of  the  Declaration  has  to  be  taken  into  account  when 
interpreting the Agreement.  Consequently, when  disputes arise over measures taken 
by Members on public health grounds, the Declaration may be used to argue that the 
panel should interpret  the  TRIPS Agreement in  a manner supportive of  a  Member’s 
right to protect public health. 

V.  A FLEXIBLE 

INTERPRETATION 

The Declaration also addresses the delicate balance between reaffirming the right 
of any WTO Member to use, to the greatest extent possible, the flexibility available in 
the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement while at the same time confirming that Members 
must  uphold  their  original TRIPS commitments. Without prejudice to  the  flexibility 
inherent  in  other  TRIPS provisions,  Ministers  have  defined  the  flexibility  in  the 
following way. 

M~DICAMENTS SANS  FRONTIERES? 

9 

Firstly, it was  recognized that each provision of the TRIPS Agreement should be 
read  or  interpreted in  particular  in  the  light  of  the  objectives and  principles  of  the 
Agreement  (i.e.  Articles 7  and  8). This  approach  is  fully  in  line  with  the  Vienna 
Convention on the Law of Treaties. This does not exclude that account be taken of the 
Preamble and other provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, where relevant. 

Secondly, with regard to compulsory licences, Ministers agreed that: “Each WTO] 
Member has the right to grant compulsory licences and the freedom to determine the 
grounds upon which such licences are granted.” The TRIPS Agreement clearly allows 
Members to grant such licences, but does not set out the grounds on which such grant 
may be based. Members are, however, still obliged to respect the terms and conditions 
of TRIPS Article 31 and other relevant provisions. 

One  concern often  expressed  about  using  the  compulsory licence as  a  way  to 
ensure  equitable  access  to  medicines  is  the  apparently  cumbersome  and  lengthy 
procedure involved in issuing such a licence. However, this is not necessarily the barrier 
it may seem. Although Article 31 prescribes a number of procedural requirements, it is 
up  to  each  Member  to  provide  for  efficient  and  equitable  granting  procedures. 
Moreover, pursuant to Article 31(b) of the TRIPS Agreement, fast-track procedures are 
possible in situations of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, 
in which case Members can issue a compulsory licence without efforts first being made 
to obtain a voluntary licence. 

Thirdly, it  has  been  agreed that  each Member has  the right  to  determine what 
constitutes a “national emergency” or “other circumstances of extreme urgency”. This 
is important because Article 3 1 (b) allows Members to issue a licence through a fast-track 
procedure when these circumstances are present. Ministers also recopzed that public 
health crises, such as  those relating to HIV/AIDS and other pandemics, can represent a 
“national emergency” or “other circumstances of extreme urgency” without prejudice 
to a Member’s right to define these notions. 

The discussion on compulsory licences was largely influenced by the fact that Brazil 
had  used  the  threat  of issuing compulsory licences in  order to  force pharmaceutical 
companies to reduce prices of, for example, melcines to combat HIV/AIDS. This upset 
the pharmaceutical industry, which strongly opposes the introduction of this type of 
governmental  policy  by  developing  countries.  In  this  respect,  one  cannot  ignore, 
however, that the governments of Canada and the United States used sirmlar policies 
when their countries were recently perceived as being threatened by anthrax. 

Finally, it was confirmed that each WTO Member is free to establish its own regime 
of  IPR  exhaustion without  there  being  a  challenge in  the  WTO dispute  settlement 
system. This confirmation is  hlly compatible with Article 6 of the TRIPS Agreement 
and constitutes a valuable contribution to the implementation of the Agreement. It was 
important that Ministers made this statement subject to the most-favoured-nation  and 

10 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

national  treatment provisions laid  down  in Articles 3  and  4  of TRIPS, because  they 
constitute basic  rights  which  need  to  be  respected  in  all possible  circumstances. A 
limited  debate  took  place  on  the  type  of  exhaustion  (ix.  national/regional  or 
international) WTO Members can provide for. It quickly became obvious that consensus 
on this issue was out of reach in this context. 

VI.  ACCOMMODATING THE NEEDS OF ALL MEMBERS 

The Declaration does not amend the rights and obligations laid down in the TRrps 
Agreement. It only clarifies the flexibility of some of the relevant provisions, thereby 
creating a  safer  legal  environment for generic suppliers and purchasers. The current 
situation is that developing countries benefiting from the transition period provided for 
under TRIPS Article  65.4  are  not  obliged to  provide  product  patent protection  for 
pharmaceuticals until  1 January 2005. In point  7  of the  Declaration, Ministers have 
instructed the TRIPS Council to take the necessary action under Article 66.1 of TRIPS 
to  extend  the  transition period  for  least-developed  country  Members  (LDCS) &om 
1 January 2006 to 1January 2016 with regard to product and process patent protection, 
data protection and enforcement. During these transition periods, generic products can 
be imported and/or exported or manufactured without restrictions into the territory of 
these countries, i.e. without the consent ofthe original patent holder. To the extent that 
patent holders have not applied for patent protection in a country or if the patents have 
expired, importation of generics into such a country is always possible. 

The extension of the transitional period for LDCS will undoubtedly be welcomed 
by the countries concerned, but should not be interpreted as an encouragement not to 
introduce patent legislation. On the contrary, it is advisable that these countries should 
seek  technical  co-operation  with  developed  countries  or  the  relevant  international 
organizations  in  order  to  assist  them  in  adopting  the  necessary  legislation  and 
administration needed for its implementation. 

This accommodation goes well together with the re-affirmation by Ministers of the 
commitment  of  developed Members to  provide  incentives  to  their  enterprises and 
institutions to provide and encourage technology transfer to the LDCS. In this context, 
it was decided at the Doha Ministerial Conference that the TRIPS Council shall put in 
place a monitoring mechanism and that developed Members shall submit a report prior 
to the end of 2002. 

VII.  AN ALL-ENCOMPASSING 

SOLUTION? 

There remains an outstanding issue on which consensus stdl needs to be found and 
which the Declaration does not address. It has been argued by developing countries that 
countries with insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector 

~ D I C A M E N T S  SANS FRONTI~RES? 

11 

could  face  difficulties in  making  effective  use  of  compulsory licences. TRIPS allows 
Members to  grant  a  compulsory licence  to  import  a  patent  protected  product  or  to 
manufixture  such  product  (or both).  However,  a  Member  is  not  entitled  to  grant  a 
compulsory licence for export purposes, because  TRIPS Article 31 (f) provides that  a 
compulsory licence  must  be  granted  “predominantly for the  supply  of the  domestic 
market of the Member authorizing such use”. This limitation possibly creates problems 
for  countries with  no  or insufficient manufacturing capacities as  they cannot grant  a 
compulsory licence  to  a  foreign  manufacturer,  neither  can  they  rely  on  compulsory 
licences by countries which do have manufacturing capacity because the latter can only 
export  a non-predominant  proportion  of the  production  under  compulsory licence. 
Members have undertaken to find a solution to this by the end of 2002. This will require 
an examination and assessment of the issue to result in recommendations for possible 
appropriate action. The EU will continue  to play  an active role  in this exercise, and 
indeed the European Commission has already pointed to possible solutions on the basis 
of TRIPS Article 30. Initial reactions from key players in this debate indicate that utilizing 
Article 30 to resolve the issue may very well be the only approach possible, as long as 
the reluctance to amend the TRIPS Agreement prevails. 

VIII.  CONSEQUENCES 

OF THE DECLARATION 

This Declaration demonstrates that intellectual property is not an obstacle to access 
to affordable medicines in developing countries. Intellectual property protection is not 
the  problem but part  of the  solution for providing such access. All  interested parties 
should be  happy with  this balanced result which meets the long-term  interests of all, 
includmg the poor populations of the globe. The Declaration provides a delicate balance 
between the interests of those who had put the issue of the relationship between TRIPS 
and  public  health  on  the  Agenda  of  the  TRIPS Council,  and  those  whose  major 
preoccupation was to safeguard the TRIPS Agreement. 

Whether this Declaration wdl have an immediate impact on prices of medicines for 
patients in  developing countries remains  to  be  seen. The Declaration recognizes the 
concerns about the effects of intellectual property protection on the price of medicines. 
It must be  stressed, however,  that  other  factors also  contribute  to  the  price  level of 
medicines. Even if medicines were free, many, for a variety of reasons, would not reach 
the  majority of those who  need  them  most. Thus, the  EU’s  Programme for Action9 
provides  for  a  number  of  other  measures  and  solutions  for  combating  the  most 
widespread communicable diseases. It is now clear that the TRIPS Agreement should not 
be seen as  an obstacle to government policies aimed at alleviating the suffering of the 
poorest of the poor. It is now paramount that all other available means of contributing 
to this goal are utilized by all, including the pharmaceutical companies. 

9 Supra, footnote 2. 

12 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

IX.  THE ROLE OF THE EU IN THE NEGOTIATIONS 

Throughout the negotiations the EU worked with a view to reconciling the almost 
irreconcilable positions of the outer ends of the spectrum. The aim was to ensure that a 
meaningful text could be put forward for adoption by all Members. The EU recognized 
that this could not be achieved by supporting one side against the other, but rather by 
taking a position that would ensure that negotiators stayed around the table in order to 
continue to communicate and converge towards an agreement. 

Moreover, for the EU, the debate on TRIPS and public health is  part of a wider 
debate  on how  to  combat  poverty in  developing countries and  how  to  establish  an 
action plan  to combat communicable chseases  such  as  HIVIAIDS. For the EU, this is 
largely a “development issue” implyng increased assistance to the developing countries 
themselves  (e.g.  by  strengthening  health  infrastructures), by  increased  research  and 
development targeting  a  wider  range  of diseases,  in particular  those  contributing  to 
public health crises in developing countries, and by addressing the relevant trade-related 
aspects. A pre-condition  for such investment is  the protection  of intellectual property 
rights,  encouraging the  role  of pharmaceutical  companies in  supplying medicines to 
developing countries at the lowest possible prices, the reduction/elimination  of tariffs 
by  developing countries of such medicines, and the prevention of their parallel trade. 

Moving these  issues  further  forward with  a  view  to  ensuring that  the  cheapest 
possible medlcines reach those who are in need requires an active contribution from all 
stakeholders. 

For the EU, the Declaration strikes the right balance between the concerns of all 
interested parties. It is fully in line with the spirit of the Doha Ministerial Declaration to 
place the needs and interests of developing and least-developed country Members at the 
heart of the further work programme of the WTO. The EU has always been a strong 
advocate of this approach and is fully committed to working towards these objectives. 
The work  towards  a  meaningful response continues.  For  example, the  EU has 
suggested that when medicines are exported to developing countries at extremely low 
prices, which may barely cover the cost of production, Members should adopt measures 
to avoid exportation of these products kom the markets for which they were intended, 
but support for such an initiative remains low. Nonetheless, the EU is in the process of 
evaluating whether  or not it needs to adopt special measures to avoid re-importation 
into the EU of such products. 

X.  CONCLUSIONS 

The  adoption  of  the  Declaration  by  the  Ministers  proves  that  the  WTO  is 
supportive of public health concerns and that intellectual property is part of the solution 
to the apparent tension  between public health  objectives and  the  interests of private 

M~DICAMENTS SANS FRONTIERES? 

13 

companies. It also proves that the WTO is not only a dispute settlement body, but also 
an  engine  for  consensus-building.  The  role  of  the  TRIPS Council  should  not  be 
underestimated, given that it was in this forum that the discussion forming the basis of 
this Declaration took place. While  it is important  to note  that this meaningful result 
could only be achieved because it was politically linked to the launching of the Doha 
Development Agenda, the  Declaration serves as  tangible evidence that consensus on 
difficult areas can be reached even where at first the obstacles seemed insurmountable. 
It also proves that developing countries can meaningfully exercise their right  to raise 
issues of particular relevance to them and progress to a solution. 

Annex 

WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION 

WT/MIN(OI)/DEc/2,20  November 2001 

MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE, Fourth Session, Doha, 9-14 November 2001. 

Declaration on the  TRIPS Agreement and  Piiblic Health 

Adopted on  14 November 2001 

1.  We recognize the gravity of the  public health problems aftlicting many developing and least- 
developed  countries,  especially  those  resulting  from  HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis,  malaria  and  other 
epidemics. 
2.  We stress the need for the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights  (TRIPS Agreement) to be part of the wider national and international action to address these 
problems. 
3. 
medicines. We also recognize the concerns about its effects on prices. 
4.  We  agree that  the  TRIPS Agreement  does not and should  not prevent  Memben from  taking 
measures  to  protect  public  health.  Accordingly, while  reiterating  our  commitment  to  the  TRIPS 
Agreement, we affirm that the Agreement can and should be interpreted and implemented in a manner 
supportive of WTO Membea’ right to protect public health and, in particular, to promote  access to 
medicines for all. 

We  recognize  that  intellectual property  protection  is  important for the  development  of new 

In this connection, we reaffirm the right of WT0 Memben to use, to the hll, the provisions in 

the TRIPS Agreement, which provide flexibility for this purpose. 

14 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

Accordingly and in the light of paragraph 4 above, while maintaining our commitments in the 

5 .  
TRIPS Agreement, we recognize that these flexibilities include: 

In applying the customary rules of interpretation of public international law, each provision 
of  the  TRIPS Agreement  shall  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  object  and  purpose  of  the 
Agreement as expressed, in particular, in its objectives and principles. 
Each Member has the right to grant compulsory licences and the freedom to determine the 
grounds upon which such licences are granted. 
Each Member has the right to determine what constitutes a national emergency or other 
circumstances of extreme urgency, it being understood that public health crises, including 
those  relating  to  HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria  and  other  epidemics,  can  represent  a 
national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency. 
The effect of the provisions in the TRIPS Agreement that are relevant to the exhaustion of 
intellectual property rights is to leave each Member f k e  to establish its own regime for such 
exhaustion without  challenge, subject  to  the  MFN [most-favoured-nation]  and  national 
treatment provisions of Articles 3 and 4. 

6.  We  recognize  that  WTO Members  with  insufficient  or  no  manufacturing  capacities in  the 
pharmaceutical sector could face difficulties in making effective use of compulsory licensing under the 
TRIPS Agreement. We instruct the Council for TRIPS to find an expeditious solution to this problem 
and to report to the General Council before the end of 2002. 
7.  We  reaffirm the  commitment of developed-country  Members to provide  incentives to their 
enterprises and institutions to promote and encourage technology transfer to least-developed country 
Members pursuant to Article 66.2. We also agree that the least-developed country Members will not 
be obliged, with respect to pharmaceutical products, to implement or apply Sections 5 and 7 of Part II 
of the TRIPS Agreement or to enforce rights provided for under these Sections until 1 January 2016, 
without prejudice to the right of least-developed country Members  to  seek other  extensions of the 
transition periods as provided for in Article 66.1 of the TRIPS Agreement. We instruct the Council for 
TRIPS to  take  the  necessary  action  to  give  effect  to  this  pursuant  to  Article  66.1  of  the  TRIPS 
Agreement. 


