The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, nos. 3/4, pp. 230–237

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2011.00416.x

‘‘Not Seeing the Woods for the Trees’’: Is the Patent
System Still Fit for Purpose?

Alison Brimelow
European Patent Ofﬁce 2007–10

The patent system is more widely debated and criticized now than at any time since the 19th century.
Predictably this produces more heat than light. Growth on the scale the system has seen in recent years must
challenge received certainties. Current analytical priorities seem well focused, but we lack courage, clear ideas
about how to respond and develop the system rather than patch it, and a willingness to shape change rather
than be shaped by it.

Keywords patents; Europe

Thou lookst through spectacles; small things seem great Below; but up unto the watch-
towre get, And see all things despoyl’d of fallacies—John Donne

I have been active in the area of patents since 1999, when I took the helm of the patent ofﬁce in the
United Kingdom, as it then was. Believe me, the job of comptroller of patents, and that
of president of the European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO), requires a lot of scrambling up and down
various towers and ediﬁces, along with copious amounts of spectacle adjustment and removal.
These are essential exercises in order to consider the patent system from the necessary different
vantage points.

A lot has changed since 1999, and my purpose today is threefold. Firstly, I want to take stock
of the patent system, and of the drivers for change that confront us today. Secondly, I would like to
ask constructively uncomfortable probing questions. Finally, I would like to share my musings and
visions about the future development of the patent system, about the priorities that should be set
and the foresight, courage and wisdom that is needed.

Taking Stock of the System

Workload Challenges
In 1999, when I ﬁrst attended the Administrative Council meetings of the European Patent
Organisation as the Head of the United Kingdom delegation, the EPO received 122,000 applica-
tions. In 2008, the last year for which we have audited data, that ﬁgure was 226,000 applications.
The patent system is becoming a victim of its own success. This growth in ﬁlings presents major
workload challenges and operational difﬁculties for patent ofﬁces world-wide. Recently, backlogs
have been ballooning. While at the EPO some 490,000 ﬁles are expecting treatment, the Japanese
Patent Ofﬁce (JPO) has to deal with around 870,000 unexamined ﬁles and the United States Patent
and Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO) with around 810,000. We expect these numbers to increase further
despite the current crisis, albeit at a lower pace. The sheer numbers threaten the very functionality
of the patent system, as pendency increases, hampering the innovation process by creating grey
areas of legal uncertainty.

Two indicators suggest that this spectacular growth in ﬁlings does not correlate with the
increase in innovation during this period: (i) ﬁrst ﬁlings, which can be used as an indicator of

230

r 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Are we asking the right questions about the patent system?

Alison Brimelow

inventive activity, have experienced a slower growth rate, and (ii) average research and develop-
ment (R&D) expenditure is not growing proportionally with the numbers of ﬁlings. This alone
should put us on notice that some aspects of the patent system probably need reﬂection and
adjustment.

Although there are numerous drivers responsible for this unprecedented growth, both within
the patent system and in the broader geo-political and economic context, the most important of all
is probably the quest for an ever-broader geographical scope of patent protection. In 2007, there
were 1.85 million patent ﬁlings world-wide, with 4.2 million pending applications world-wide, and
6.3 million patents in force. In 2008, it was estimated that over a quarter of a million applications
were ﬁled in more than one of the ‘‘IP5’’ ofﬁces: the EPO, the JPO, the Korean Intellectual
Property Ofﬁce (KIPO), the State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce of the People’s Republic of China
(SIPO) and the USPTO.

I happen to believe that backlogs are inherently unhealthy. They lengthen pendency, which
increases legal uncertainty—and this in turn has a chilling effect on innovation, in terms of both
R&D investment as well as in the later stages of the adoption and implementation of new
technologies. Patent examiners should be looking at cutting-edge innovation, not be derided as
‘‘technology historians’’. But in fairness, I have to note that backlogs are also an opportunity for
economic and competitive advantage for many. ‘‘A man is seldom so innocently occupied as when
he is engaged in making money’’, as the saying goes—which is attributed to Dr. Johnson. However,
as a policy maker by upbringing, I am always troubled by unintended consequences.

We are in the midst of an economic crisis, and it is having an impact on the patent system.
From 2009 onwards, we have registered a dip in ﬁling ﬁgures of about 8% in comparison with
2008, but current economic indicators are giving mixed signals in Europe; hence, it is too early to
assess whether this is a blip or a trend. So far, given the size of backlogs and the current volume of
incoming work, it appears unlikely that the present economic crisis will sufﬁce to re-calibrate the
patent system in a lasting manner. It would appear that, absent either cataclysmic economic
developments or decisive measures, backlogs are here to stay, and this raises a number of issues
that warrant urgent attention. I address them below.

Public Scrutiny and Its Consequences
The past decade is the period in history during which the growth in patent ﬁlings has increased the
most rapidly, propelling patents from an arcane legal instrument to a trendy intellectual property
(IP) right of unprecedented economic importance in our current innovation-driven and informa-
tion-driven global society. This prominence has brought with it a heightened level of public
scrutiny. For most of its history, the patent system operated more or less in obscurity, remaining
the province of relatively few specialists in the ﬁeld. Now, however, everybody not only thinks they
know what a patent is, but they also have an opinion on the patent system.

The last time the system was so widely debated was the nineteenth century, when the rapidly
industrializing nations of Europe (and the United States of America) debated not only the ethics of
the system, but how best to exploit it: Switzerland’s dye stuff industry was built on the non-
availability of patents for German innovations in the ﬁeld within Switzerland. Our current debate
is not necessarily a well-informed one. The patent system remains complex and abstract and when
civil society and politicians begin sticking their oar in, the result, more often than not, is a
muddying of the waters.

All IP is a trade-off between short-term costs and long-term beneﬁts. The function of the
patent system is ill-understood and often misapprehended, and as a result, the social contract that
it creates is being increasingly questioned. Nevertheless, public opinion now inﬂuences IP policy

r 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, nos. 3/4

231

Alison Brimelow

Are we asking the right questions about the patent system?

debates and is a driver for change, albeit sometimes based on dangerous misconceptions and
oversimpliﬁcations. That this is a fact of our political life should be understood, and we should
engage with it.

In 2005, the EPO commissioned a study beginning with a series of interviews of prominent
specialists from around the world and all walks of patent life, aptly entitled ‘‘Interviews for the
Future’’. This was the beginning of a bold experiment that was copiously derided by those who did
not understand its fundamental premises. In Scenarios for the Future, published in 2007, the EPO
developed a series of hypotheses that were not meant to be an exhaustive analysis of the drivers for
change impacting on the patent system or even remotely an attempt to predict the future. Our aim
was to understand the context in which the patent system functions, identify the right questions for
input into the policymaking process, encourage reﬂection and promote an effort to enhance the
understanding of the patent system. And in this regard, it was a very interesting and successful
exercise, bordering on prescience, as some of the hypotheses considered have already come to pass.
Within the course of this exercise, Francis Gurry, Director General of the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO), was of the view that ‘‘paradoxically, too much importance is
attached to IP, and insufﬁcient credit given to it’’. Patent ofﬁces around the world are running
national (or regional) virtual political campaigns to educate their policy makers, assuage their
critics and inform public opinion. Education is ﬁne, but I would suggest that most of us are missing
a very important point: the patent system is simply far too complex for its own good or anybody
else’s, and this complexity increases exponentially in the international arena.

We need to simplify the patent system, and particularly in terms of global initiatives, we need
to reduce the level of complexity where possible. This will not only improve patent systems
generally but also make it easier to proselytize about their underlying beneﬁts. My personal view is
that any illusion that this conviction has been embraced by major players will quickly be dispelled
if one considers the very lovely slide of the implemented, proposed and piloted Patent Prosecution
Highways (PPHs) between the 14 ofﬁces currently participating in this scheme. For those of you
who have never seen it, it looks like a multicoloured diagram of instructions for sorting out a
tangled ball of wool.

I would like to review brieﬂy some of the other repercussions of the increased importance and
awareness of the patent system. Economic analysis of the patent system is not a new discipline, but
in the past, it was considered an intellectually interesting fringe exercise with little impact on the
policies or the development of the patent system. Now, some of us at least engage with the insights
emanating from rather more rigorous economic analysis, which have become important diagnostic
tools decisively shaping patent policies. But this is not universally the case, and I particularly wish
the European Union Commission would be more thoughtful on the subject. I see little or no sign of
evidence-based policy making there.

Another side-effect of increased public scrutiny is the increase in friction between patents and
other legal and regulatory areas. The interface between patents and competition law is one
example. There has always been a delicate balance and a certain tension between these areas.
Recently, this tension has been exacerbated—arguably quite needlessly. In Europe, competition
authorities have become more critical of the impact of IP rights on the market and more aggressive
in asserting the rights of consumers, as demonstrated in the recent Microsoft case and in the
pharmaceutical sector inquiry. We must be vigilant and not allow this balance to be inadvertently
upset. Back to the need of evidence-based policy again.

The interface between patents and standards is another area where policies resulting in
functional incompatibilities have to be resolved—an issue that is being discussed within the
WIPO’s Standing Committee on Patents (SCP). In this regard, my view would be that any

232

r 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, nos. 3/4

Are we asking the right questions about the patent system?

Alison Brimelow

necessary accommodations should be made post-grant. Policy makers would do well to steer clear
of proposals of a nature to restrict patentable subject-matter or otherwise impact on the patent-
granting process. That process is quite difﬁcult enough as it is and I am profoundly critical of
policy ‘‘initiatives’’ that either treat the patent system as a lightning conductor for other problems
or as a dustbin for ‘‘difﬁcult’’ issues.

Finally, the role of the patent system as an economic tool to address issues other than primary
one-size-ﬁts-all innovation promotion appears to be evolving as well, as can be observed in the area
of ‘‘green technology’’ (or ‘‘Climate Change Mitigation Technologies’’, as the EPO prefers to call
it). Patent ofﬁces are contributing to stimulate innovation in environmentally friendly technology,
by fast-tracking ‘‘green technology’’ applications. Patent ofﬁces can also serve the public interest
by promoting the rapid dissemination of green technological information. One of the initiatives
under consideration would be to introduce a new classiﬁcation scheme to capture and reﬂect the
pertinent technology sectors.

I can also surmise that before long, the reverse side of this coin will become an issue—that is
sovereign countries will become tempted to invoke provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related
aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS) on public welfare with regard to patents on important
‘‘green’’ inventions. Here, the issue will be whether such exceptions will be able to be shoehorned
into thinly stretched existing TRIPS provisions on ‘‘public health’’ or garden-variety compulsory
licenses, or whether some states will aggressively pursue the introduction of new exceptions with
regard to the use of green technology, in the public interest. I fear that tough policy decisions will
soon loom.

Finally, I am not sure that we have yet reached a clear policy view on what exactly we are
trying to achieve. Absent such clarity, I can only foresee a growth of ambiguity and uncertainty
that can without doubt be exploited for economic gain, but that is far removed from the patent
system’s basic aim of supporting innovation and invention.

The Patent System: Fit for Purpose?

So are we worried about the right things? Are we addressing the right issues?

There is much concern today, including at the EPO, about all sorts of applicant behavioural
pathologies, such as gaming of the system, patent thickets, defensive patenting, patent trolls and
assorted manifestations of post-grant anti-competitive behaviour. Deﬁning the limits of patentable
subject-matter—living matter, computer-implemented inventions, business methods—is a source
of unease in the civil society on policy grounds. In addition, these deﬁnitions are difﬁcult to
articulate into predictable and consistent norms, raising tough issues for patent ofﬁces, regulators
and courts alike.

Internationally, talks on the further development of an international patent system have
ground to a halt, more or less taken over by less developed countries, to force adherence to and
compliance with the convention on biodiversity, further the development agenda and otherwise
prevent the further international integration of patent systems, which is—in my view—wrongly
perceived to be solely in the interest of industrialized nations.

All these diverse topics are not only hot and interesting, they are also very important. If
neglected, they have the potential to bring the patent system into disrepute. We are thus right to be
worrying about them, and should revisit the tenets of the patent system, to design and deliver
effective corrective policies in many areas. On the other hand, these issues do not begin to address
what should be our paramount concern: ensuring the continued viability of the patent system at the
ﬁnancial, structural and operational levels.

r 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, nos. 3/4

233

Alison Brimelow

Are we asking the right questions about the patent system?

Financial Issues
Generally, in Europe, policy makers tend to overemphasize the beneﬁts of patenting. Because
patents are potentially very lucrative, there is a perception that innovators cannot do without them.
For years, probably partly due to the increasing emphasis on the patent as a property right—rather
than a privilege, as it was historically conceived of—there has been a tendency to consider that
cheap access to patents should be guaranteed for all.

The inventor in his garret has long been replaced by managed, team-based innovation,
combined with systematic, strategic appropriation of resulting knowledge, with broad geographi-
cal coverage being vital. For many small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), patents are no
longer a means to re-coup R&D investment, but rather patent applications are ﬁled in order to be
able to obtain the ﬁnancing necessary to develop innovations and bring them to market. In some
areas, patents have become a currency, a means to gain access to legitimately pooled knowledge,
without which survival of the entity in the market would not be possible. A balance must be struck.
At the EPO, despite our reputation for being expensive, successful patentees still subsidize the
system through the payment of renewal fees. This allows many applicants to navigate the system
below cost, often embarking on ‘‘what the heck’’ applications that end up clogging the system. This
reliance on renewal fees is a problem for the EPO. The contracting states set the amount of their
respective renewal fees, half of which accrue to the EPO, and the average duration of patent
maintenance is decreasing. Both these elements make renewal fees an unreliable source of income,
making it difﬁcult for the ofﬁce to plan and budget.

I know some countries have other problems, such as fee diversion, where the patent system
becomes a means to raise funds for the general treasury. I wonder whether policy makers realize
that what mainly distinguishes such systems from Elizabethan monopolies in the sixteenth century
is that the twenty-ﬁrst-century treasuries conﬁne the economic damage to innovators only.

I believe that our fees should be structured so that only meritorious and seriously drafted
applications are ﬁled by applicants, who then pay the cost-covering fees for the work performed by
the ofﬁce. No more, no less. In the case of the EPO, there is a need to review our fee structure, and I
believe the outcome would undoubtedly make initial access to the patent system ﬁnancially more
onerous. This view may not be terribly popular but in my opinion, such a review is inevitable if the
EPO’s virtues of quality and relative timeliness are to be preserved, and the use of the system is to
revert to what it was originally envisaged to be.

Harmonization
The other major problem facing the patent system today is that the economy has evolved and
globalized, the R&D paradigms have changed, the function of IP is shifting and patent systems
world-wide have failed to adapt and develop in consequence. It is a pity, historically considered. IP
was off to a rather good start, initially. The Paris Convention, concluded in 1883, was the second
international multilateral treaty, right after the creation of the Postal Union. In operational terms,
what is needed in view of workload issues and the rationalization of processes—and everybody
knows this—is greater integration and the creation of a truly global, sustainable patent system.

In the best of worlds, such a global patent system would start out with an international
infrastructure operating under a harmonized body of laws, regulations and practices. This is the
mantra of the representatives of industrialized countries. No other stance is politically correct. Yet
at the moment, international normative initiatives are all more or less at a standstill, as delegations
‘‘act’’ globally, but think locally.

International substantive patent law harmonization has been pursued within WIPO on and off
since 1983. In the wake of the breakdown of the ﬁrst attempt to conclude such a Treaty in 1993, a

234

r 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, nos. 3/4

Are we asking the right questions about the patent system?

Alison Brimelow

more modest Treaty harmonizing formalities, the Patent Law Treaty (PLT), was concluded in
2000. Negotiations on the Substantive Patent Law Treaty (SPLT) were kicked off in WIPO’s SCP
in May 2001. Initially, this was a highly ambitious endeavour, which was intended to result in
‘‘deep harmonization’’, going from general substantive norms down to a detailed regulatory
framework. It focused on the norms that, not coincidentally, would constitute the minimum legal
framework maximizing the beneﬁts of international cooperation in the area of sharing of work.

The SCP discussed the draft SPLT until meetings ceased to be constructive, with developed
and developing countries pursuing their own agendas to the point where the committee was unable
even to reach an agreement as to the modalities and scope of its future work. The EPO, JPO and
USPTO began parallel discussions on a ‘‘reduced package’’ within the forum of the Trilateral
Cooperation, focusing on provisions concerning novelty, inventive step, the grace period and prior
art. In 2005, the ‘‘Group B+ Working Group I’’ was set up to pursue the discussion of the draft
SPLT ‘‘reduced package’’ at an expert level. However, even within that forum of industrialized
countries, it was not possible to achieve a consensus on some central issues. Eventually, the SPLT
entered into a state of dormancy. This epic saga forces me to conclude that there is a gap between
what people say and what people are prepared to do.

In mid-2009, the Industry Trilateral called for the resumption of harmonization negotiations
on the SPLT, and the Group B+ Plenary has agreed to reconvene its Working Group I in a timely
manner in 2010 to reopen discussions on a ‘‘reduced package’’ for harmonization. Is this a good
thing? Inherent in the concept of harmonization is change. If we are not prepared to change, we
cannot possibly pretend to be serious about harmonization.

This is an illustration of many of the challenges that we currently face. Do we have the energy
and courage to do what is required to take the steps that will beneﬁt all? There are times when I
think all these harmonization initiatives are merely an excuse to travel and it would be interesting
indeed to compute the carbon footprint of the draft SPLT. In my view, if we are not prepared to
change, due to misapprehension of our national interests or any other reason, we should indeed
also have the courage to say so and refuse another round that would be doomed to fail.

Work-Sharing
Given the failure of the normative harmonization process at the world level, pragmatism is
prevailing. Global backlogs have become a driver for change, and they have created a powerful
impetus world-wide for reducing unnecessary duplication of work. Patent ofﬁces are now striving
for effective international operational cooperation. With patent ofﬁces world-wide making use of
information technology and databases, and increasingly working together to create technical
compatibility between systems, the case for a nationally bound, independent assessment of novelty
and inventive step has been considerably weakened.

Does this mean that there is room for effective, quality-enhancing collaboration between
patent ofﬁces without substantive patent law harmonization? The answer is undoubtedly yes.
Work sharing or utilization networks are springing up throughout the world: the Vancouver
Group, initiatives within ASEAN and in South America, within the European Patent Network,
and of course,
in the conclusion of a plethora of bilateral PPH Agreements. Additionally,
initiatives exist to increase utilization within the framework of the Patent Cooperation Treaty
(PCT).

The common denominator of such schemes is to take concrete measures that help to eliminate
unnecessary duplication of work between the ofﬁce of ﬁrst ﬁling (OFF) and the ofﬁce of second
ﬁling (OSF) by utilizing each other’s work. Timeliness and high quality of work products, as well as
conﬁdence-building and coordination between ofﬁces, are the essential
ingredients for these

r 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, nos. 3/4

235

Alison Brimelow

Are we asking the right questions about the patent system?

schemes to be successful. For instance, to ensure timeliness of work results, it is essential for OFFs
to prioritize work performed on ﬁrst ﬁlings. The EPO does this as a matter of course. As far as the
structuring of work sharing is concerned, we must remember that we already have the beginnings
of a global patent system: the PCT, which is not being used to its full potential. Is it rational to
devote a huge amount of resources proposing a plethora of alternatives to the PCT, when the
policy goals thereby pursued are exactly those of the PCT (reduction of duplication of work,
utilization, conﬁdence building)? I doubt it. Furthermore, a network of PPHs does nothing to
address the need for simpliﬁcation of the patent system mentioned earlier.

The EPO, along with WIPO and European and Trilateral users, believes that the greatest
potential for a global work-sharing scheme lies with the PCT. After all, nearly 164,000 applications
were ﬁled under the PCT in last year alone. We should improve the existing PCT framework, in
particular by focusing on measures to increase conﬁdence in the work of patent ofﬁces that act as
international authorities under the PCT. The EPO would like to agree to a common position with
its partners on a number of issues, in particular regarding the timing of the international search and
the avoidance of duplication of work, notably by ensuring that ISAs do not re-do their own work
in the national phase.

Thus, the EPO is delighted that at the Group B+ Plenary meeting in Geneva at the end of
September 2009, support was expressed for PCT reform and it was agreed to launch a new
initiative within the Group B+ to explore ways to improve the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the
PCT. Let us hope we meant it. In any case, work-sharing must help to maintain and improve the
quality of patents granted world-wide.

The EPO is of the opinion that if work-sharing is to be carried out properly and efﬁciently, it is
of cardinal importance that the appropriate infrastructure and environment be established. In
October 2008, the Heads of the EPO, JPO, USPTO, KIPO and SIPO met in Korea to create a new
vehicle for pursuing international cooperation in this regard: the ‘‘IP5’’. The main objective of the
IP5 is essentially to pursue greater operational integration leading to the creation of a sound,
viable, sustainable global patent system, focused on work-sharing. The aim is to create the
conditions for ofﬁces of ﬁrst ﬁling to do the main work once, with high quality, for other ofﬁces
to be able to re-use the results. Participating ofﬁces are committed to ‘‘getting the fundamentals
right’’ for efﬁcient work-sharing, and this initiative ranked very high in my priorities during my
tenure as president of the EPO.

The IP5 foundation projects are ambitious and require a considerable investment of scarce
resources in the present. But they are not politically attractive because, unlike the PPH, for
instance, which permits quick headlines, the IP5 projects will deliver productive results and
momentum beyond electoral periods, which is why it is vitally important to enhance their visibility
and keep the pressure on. In my view, the ‘‘IP5’’ is potentially as huge as the conclusion of the
European Patent Convention (EPC) in terms of its signiﬁcance for the patent world. If the IP5
ofﬁces persevere, we will be building the foundation of an international system, enabling efﬁcient
work-sharing that will deliver long-term and sustainable beneﬁts for all and this, even without any
substantive harmonization breakthroughs.

Doing Things in the Right Order
As a matter of fact, I wonder whether the fact that politicians and lawyers cannot seem to agree on
harmonization, so that operational integration may precede it, is not a blessing in disguise.
Although reference is often made to the recent explosive growth of patent systems world-wide, at
least in Europe, closer scrutiny of recent history shows that this is merely the acceleration of a long-
running trend. When the EPO was created, the founding fathers estimated that the ofﬁce would be

236

r 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, nos. 3/4

Are we asking the right questions about the patent system?

Alison Brimelow

dealing with about 30,000 applications a year. This ﬁgure was exceeded within 6 years, and with the
exception of a minor hiccup in the early 1990s, ﬁling ﬁgures at the EPO have always steadily
increased until the present economic crisis. Why? Well, the PCT and the creation of the EPO meant
that acquiring geographically broad patent protection became simpler, cheaper and thus more
attractive. Hence, more applicants did.

The wave of accelerated growth that began in the mid-1990s has been attributed to the
combined effect of several drivers, including an increasingly globalized economy and . . . the entry
into force of the TRIPS, which rendered broad geographical patent protection meaningful, by
ensuring that patent rights when granted would also be enforceable. There is a lesson here. In the
international arena, every improvement of the legal or administrative patent infrastructure has
spawned a wave of increased patenting activity. Multilateral solutions do not just provide the
means to cope with increased demands, they fuel these very demands. In other words, ‘‘If you build
it, they will come’’.

In this regard, it might be all the better if substantive patent law harmonization—perhaps
rendered more attractive by work-sharing arrangements that would maximize the efﬁciency gains
that harmonization might bring—occurred after the infrastructure for dealing with another
potential growth spurt had been set up, rather than before. This way, should the SPLT ever come
to pass, the patent ofﬁces of the world would be better equipped to face the onslaught.

Conclusion

All in all, when I survey the patent landscape, I think that current analyses of the problems
confronting the patent system are all more or less correct. Where the patent system functions in
manners that are sub-optimal, it is not for want of understanding. However, I think that we are all
slightly short on courage, we could do with clearer ideas and ﬁnally, we should embrace change
better, particularly those changes we can choose, as opposed to those that are thrust upon us as we
miss windows of opportunity. As I regularly said to colleagues at the EPO: ‘‘shape the future, or it
will shape you’’.

About the Author

Alison Brimelow CBE was President of the European Patent Ofﬁce from 1 July 2007 to 30 June
2010; e-mail: alisonbrimelow469@btinternet.com

Note

This is the edited text of the Second Francis Gurry Public Lecture on Intellectual Property, delivered by the

author at the Melbourne Law School on 1 March 2010.

r 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2011) Vol. 14, nos. 3/4

237


