Introducing Plant Breeders’ Rights in India 

A  Critical Evaluation of 

the Proposed  Legislation 

Biswajit  DHAR and Sachin CHATURVEDI* 

INTRODUCTION 

Agriculture in  India  is  on  the  threshold  of major  changes as  the  country  takes 
steps towards extending intellectual property protection (IPP) to this sector. The early 
initiatives to bring agriculture within  the  ambit  of IPP  in  the  country  were  taken at 
the  end  of  the  eighties,  but  the  momentum  towards  this  end  came  following  the 
commitments  undertaken  by  Inda  as  a  part  of  the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related 
Aspects  of  Intellectual Property fights  (TRIPS), formalized at  the  conclusion of the 
Uruguay  Round  of  GATT negotiations.  The  Agreement  on  TRIPS proposes  far- 
reaching  changes  in  the  norms  and  standards of protection  of  intellectual property 
world-wide.  Developing countries have  undertaken to  amend  their existing regimes 
for  the  protection  of  intellectual property  and  adopt  ones which  are  akin  to  those 
prevarling in the  industrialized countries. The harmonized system of IPP  that would 
thus  come  into  existence  has  two major  departures  fi-om  the  hitherto  existing 
international system: 

(i) the  scope  of protection  afforded by  the  IPP regime  would  be  considerably 

wider; and 

(ii) the rights of the owners of intellectual property would be stronger. 

In  the  former  instance,  the  most  significant  is  the  requirement  to  extend  IPP  to 
agriculture by  protecting  improved  varieties  of  plants  by  providing  plant  breeders’ 
rights  (PBRs).  This  form  of  protection,  which  has  come  to  be  accepted  globally 
through  the  International  Union  for  the  Protection  of  New  Varieties  of  Plants, 
commody  known  as  the  UPOV Convention,  provides  explicit  recognition  only  to 
the commercial plant breeders engaged in developing new plant varieties. For several 
developing countries like  India,  where  agricultural system  have  been  based  almost 
exclusively  on farming communities, introduction  of  PBRS has  implications for  the 
continuation of the farmers’ tradtional practices. 

Aligned and Other Developing Countries, New D e b ,  India. 

*  Fellow  and  Research  Associate,  respectively,  of  the  Research  and Information  System  for  the  Non- 
The  views  expressed here  are  the  authors’ own  and not  necessarily  those  of the  organization  to  which 

they belong. 

246 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

In  India, a  cogent  articulation of the  importance attached  to  the  understanding 
of the  implications of PBRS has  been  the  debate that has  taken  place in  the country 
since  the  beginning  of  the  nineties  as  initiatives were  taken  by  the  government  to 
introduce  IPP  in  agriculture. The key  feature  of this  debate is  that  it was joined  by 
several  non-governmental  organizations,  includmg  farmers'  organizations,  who 
emphasized the  need  to  recognize,  in  the  proposed  regime  of  IPP,  the  contribution 
made by  the  traditional farmers towards the conservation and preservation of genetic 
strains. 
1 

In  addressing the  needs  of farmers, the  debate was  able to reflect  on the  more 
critical  aspects  of  the  introduction  of  PBKS in  a  farmer-dominated  agricultural 
system,  particularly  its  impact  on  the  traditional  practices  of  farmers,  as  the  plant 
breeders  exercise  their  control  over  the  use  of  protected  varieties  of  plants.  Three 
years  after  the  government  first  suggested  a  fiamework  for  PBRS that  Inma  could 
adopt  by  proposing  the  Plant  Varieties  Act  (PvA-the 
first  draft  was  prepared  in 
1994), the  key  elements of the  proposed  legislation  have  finally  been  evolved. The 
present  article seeks to  analyse  critically the  key  features of this proposed legislation. 
The  authors  w d ,   in  particular,  reflect  upon  the  manner  in  which  the  respective 
interests  of  the  farmers  and  the  commercial  plant  breeders  have  been  taken  into 
consideration  in  this  legislation.  The  dwussion  makes  appropriate  comparisons 
between the  two  main  drafts  of the  proposed legislation that  have  been prepared by 
the  government in  an  attempt to  capture  the  shifts  in  emphasis  in  the  objectives of 
the legislation over time. 

An  assessment  of the  proposed  legislation  is  called  for  in  light  of the  initiatives 
that  were  taken  in  the  country  to  introduce  PBRS. The  initiatives,  as  mentioned 
earlier, were  taken  at  the  end  of the  eighties and were  supported by  the  expandmg 
private  sector  seed  industry in  India.  In  the  first  section, therefore,  these  initiatives 
and some of the  more  definite  efforts made  at presenting  a  framework for  a  system 
of PBRS for India are hscussed briefly.  The main  elements of the legislation that the 
Indian  government  has  proposed  for  the  introduction  of  PBRS in  the  country  are 
critically  evaluated  in  Sections  II  and  111:  in  Section  11, 
the  main  focus  of  the 
discussion  is  on the effect of the proposed regime  of IPP on the agricultural practices 
of the farmers in  the  country; and  Section  111  tries to assess  the  extent to which the 
proposed legislation conforms to the requirements of the Agreement on TRIPS. 
In  critically  evaluating  the  attempts  to  introduce  the  regime  of  IPP 

in 
agriculture,  the  article  underscores  the  importance  of  looking  beyond  the  narrow 
confines  of  the  system  whch  recognizes  the  contribution  only  of  the  commercial 
plant breeders in the progress  of agriculture. 

' See,  for example, Sahai (1994), Shiva (1996) and Sharma  (1994). 

PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS IN INDIA 

247 

I. 

INITIATIVES TO INTRODUCE PBRS IN INDIA 

Although the issue of adopting PBRS in  India  came into public gaze  only in the 
final  phases  of  the  Uruguay  Round  negotiations,  initiatives  to  bring  agriculture 
within the ambit of IPP, as stated at the outset, were taken much earlier. What makes 
the  Indian  experience more  interesting  is  that  pressure  for  introducing  PBRS came 
from  the  expanding  private  seed  industry  in  the  closing  years  of  the  eighties 
following the  adoption of the  New  Seed Policy in  198g2 and not  solely  in  response 
to  the  commitment  made  by  the  country  as  a  part  of  the  Agreement  on  TRIPS. 
Thus,  while  it  can  be  said  that  the  TRIPS Agreement provided  momentum  for  the 
process  initiated  for  evolving  a  system  of  IPP  in  agriculture,  the  essentials  of  the 
framework  were  provided,  as  shall  be  seen  below,  more  by  the  domestic  play  of 
forces. 

The  pressure  that  the  private  seed  companies  in  Inha  applied  for  the 
introduction  of  IPP  in  agriculture were  quite  in  keeping  with  the  trends  that  the 
seed industries in  the  major  industrialized countries had  witnessed  over  the  last  few 
decades, as  private interests  expanded their operations in the  area  of plant  breeding. 
In  the  process,  the  production  of  superior  varieties  of planting  material which  had 
been  largely  carried  out  by  the  public  sector  in  these  countries  in  the  past,  was 
increasingly taken up  by  the private  seed companie~.~ The eighties also saw a  hrther 
expansion of  the  private sector’s  operations,  as  major  transnational corporations like 
Unilever,  ICI,  Monsanto,  and  Rohm  and  Haas,  involved  in  the  agrochemical 
industry, entered into the  area  of plant breeding.4 This took  place primarily because 
these  conglomerates  aimed  at  offering  agricultural  technology  as  an  integrated 
package  in  which  the  improved  varieties  of  planting  material  were  the  critical 
component.  An  effective  system  of  IPP was  considered  as  the  sine  qua  non  for  the 
corporate interests to obtain returns on their investment in this activity. 

In  India, support for  the  arguments presented by  the  seed companies in  favour 
of  PBRS was  provided  by  several  studies,  among  which  was  an  influential  study 
prepared in  the  late  eighties by  USAID. The USAID study argued,  in  particular, that 
the  government needed  to  create conditions to  ensure that private sector companies 
could capture the benefits by  undertaking research.  Introduction of a  “Plant Variety 
Protection  Act”  was  considered as  one  of the  key  measures  that  was  required  to  be 
taken in this regard.5 

The government, on its part, responded  to  the growing pressures  by  requesting 
the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAo)  to  study  the  implications  of 
introducing  a  “Plant  Variety  Rights  System”  for  the  development  of  the  seed 
industry  in  India  and  make  recommendations on  the  framework  upon  which  the 

For d e d  see Seed Association of India  (1990). 
See Smith (1996). 
Sehgal (1996) discusses the details. 
FAO  (1990), p. 2. 

248 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

national PBR legislation could be based.  The emphasis of this initiative taken by  the 
government was  thus solely on  protecting the  interests of the  seed industry. As  will 
be  discussed below,  this  contrasts with  the  later  efforts at  evolving a  framework of 
IPP  for  agriculture  which  would  take  into  consideration  the  interests  of  the 
traditional farmers in  the proposed regime.  Given the  above-mentioned perspective, 
it was  no surprise therefore that the FAO study, which was  finally submitted in  1993, 
presented the  breeders’ viewpoint in  making its  recommendations on  the  nature of 
the 
IPP  regime  needed.  This  was  most  obvious  from  one  of  its  major 
recommendations which  stated:  “. . . any  form  of Plant Breeders’ Rights legislation 
in  Inha  should  conform  as  far  as  the  Indian  conditions  allow,  to  the  UPOV 
Convention.”6 The import of this recommendation is elaborated below. 

The  UPOV Convention,  to  which  the  FAO  study  referred,  was  established in 
1961  to  give  effect  at  the  international level  to  the  system  of  PBRS. Developed 
almost  exclusively with  a  view  to  protecting the  interests  of  the  commercial plant 
breeders  in  Europe,’  the  PBRS allowed the  plant  breeders  to  exercise  control  over 
the  production  and  marketing  of  seeds  and  other  propagating  material  of  the 
protected plant varieties. At  the same time, however, the UPOV allowed the Member 
States to  grant limited privileges to  farmers regarding the  re-use  of harvested seeds, 
and also to exchange seeds with their farm neighbours. 

The  above-mentioned  features  of  the  UPOV remained,  until  a  comprehensive 
amendment of  the  UPOV Convention in  1991  (henceforth UPOV ’91)* resulted in 
the  strengthening of the  rights of  plant  breeders.  The  scope of  the  breeders’ rights 
were  expanded  to  include  the  harvested  material  and  also  the  products  of  the 
harvested material. In  other words,  use  of the  protected  varieties would  now  allow 
the plant breeders to lay their claims not  only on the harvested crops but also  on any 
other  product  that  used  the  crops.  Besides  enlarging the  scope  of  breeders’ rights, 
UPOV ’91 contributed to  the  strengthening of the breeders’ rights by  restricting the 
ability of  the  farmers to  re-use  the  harvested  seeds.  This  implies  that  limits  were 
imposed on farmers’ privileges which were available earlier. This aspect of UPOV ’91 
wlll be  discussed later. 

These  restrictions on  the  farmers  imposed by  UPOV ’91  notwithstanding, the 
FAO  study  made  its  major  recommendation  that  India  should  adopt  the  broad 
contours of the  UPOV while drawing up  the Plant  Variety Protection Act.  What is 
most  curious  about  this  recommendation  is  that  it  came  despite  the  observation 
made  in  the  study  that  the  UPOV may  not  be  “entirely appropriate for  India  and 
other  developing countries at  an  early  stage”  considering the  fact  that  it  was  not 
“formulated  with  the  specific  needs  of  developing  countries  in  mind“.’  This 

’ The other Omnisation for  Economic Co-operation  and DeveloDment countries acceded to  the  UPOV 
FAO  (1993), p.  2. 
in  the  eighties.  The  h t e d  States became  a  partyto  the  Convention ;n  1981, and  Australia  accepted UPOV 
membership in  1989. 

The earlier amendments to the Ueov were in 1972 and  1978. 
FAO  (1993). p. 2. 

PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS  IN INDIA 

249 

recommendation  was,  however,  justified  by  the  study  while  putting  forth  the 
argument  that  since  most  countries  that  had  enacted  PBR  legislation  were  its 
Members,  the  UPOV Convention  provided  a  model  on  which  national  legislations 
should be  based.  It  was  further  maintained  that  adoption  of  the  UPOV Convention 
allowed  reciprocal  rights  in  Member  countries which,  accordmg to  the  FAO  study, 
was  important, particularly in relation to other countries growing similar crops. 

In  contrast  to  the  major  recommendation  of  the  FAO study  that  Indla  should 
accept  the  UPOV Convention  as  the  basis  for  its  legislation  on  plant  varieties 
protection,  an  independent  initiative  taken  by  the  M.S.  Swaminathan  Research 
Foundation  proposed  an  alternative framework  for  legislation.  The  key  element  of 
this  initiative was  that  it  represented an  attempt  to  translate the  FAO’S International 
Undertahng  on  Plant  Genetic  Resources,  which  sought 
the 
contributions made by both  commercial plant breeders and the farming communities 
towards the  development of agriculture, while introducing legislation.”  The drafi of 
this  Plant  Variety  Recognition  and  Rights  (PVRR) Act  stated that  the  objective  of 
the  legislation  was  to  grant  “recognition  and  economic  reward”  to  not  only  the 
modern plant breeders for developing new varieties but also the  “rural/tribal families 
responsible  for  the  conservation and  development  of  the  genetic  strains that  would 
have  gone  into  the  pedigrees  of  varieties  accorded  recognition  under  the  PVRR 
Act.””  In  recognizing  the  contributions  made  by  the  rural/tribal  f a d e s  towards 
conservation,  the  draft  legislation,  in  effect,  tried  to  recognize  the  rights  of  the 
farmer-innovators,  who  have  remained  an  integral  part  of  the  agricultural  system 
down the millennium.12 

to  recognize 

The response  of  the  government towards  the  suggestions for  extending  IPP in 
agriculture, as  discussed  above, was  twofold.  In  1994, the  draft  of  a  Plant  Varieties 
Act  was  prepared  which  significantly included  elaborate provisions  giving  effect  to 
the  concept  of  farmers’ rights.  But,  in  a  substantially altered  fi-amework that  was 
eventually  evolved,  the  structure  of  the  proposed  legislation  shows  a  degree  of 
acceptance of the recommendations made by  the  FAO in  that the UPOV Convention 
appears to  have  been largely followed. The following dwussion provides the  details 
of the proposed legislation. 

11.  FEATURES O F  THE LEGISLATION  ON PLANT  VARIETIES  PROTECTION 

The proposed  legislation  on  the  protection  of plant  varieties  seems, ostensibly, 
to  address  the  mounting  global  pressure  to  extend  IPP by  accepting  some  of  the 

lo  FAO (1989). 
11 

Artic’le, 1. 

M.S. Swami~than Research  Foundation  (1994). This  objective  of  the  proposed  Act  was set  out  in 
A wealth of literature is available on the role of the  farmer-innovators  in agriculture. See, for example, 
Biggs  and  Clay  (1981) and  IDRC  (1994). For a  brief historical account of agricultural  innovations  in  ancient 
India see Indian Council of Agricultural Research (1964). 

250 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

features of the  UPOV Convention.  Amendment  of the  UPOV in  1991 was  explicitly 
introduced  to  strengthen  the  rights  of  breeders,  and  it  is  some  of  the  features  of 
UPOV ’91  that  have  been  incorporated  in  the  proposed  Indian  legislation.  At  the 
same  time,  however,  some  efforts  have  been  made  to  balance  the  ovenvhelrmng 
rights  that 
introduction  of  specific 
instruments like compulsory licensing and licence  of right,  which  could prevent the 
exercise of breeders’ rights to the detriment of the. broadly defined public interest. 

the  breeders  would  enjoy, 

through 

the 

Three  features  of  the  proposed  legislation on  the  protection  of  plant  varieties 

reflect  its adherence to the framework provided by  UPOV ’91. These are: 

the coverage of varieties qualifjring for protection; 

(i) 
(ii)  the  inclusion  of  “essentially  derived  varieties”  within  the  scope  of 

protection; and 
the status of traditional farming communities in the proposed Act. 

(iii) 

The  following  discussion brings  out  the  above-mentioned  aspects  of  the  proposed 
legislation.  What  needs  to  be  particularly  mentioned  is  that  while  the  first  two 
features were  a  part  of the  PVA of  1994, the  status of the  farming communities was 
given an  entirely different orientation. It is the change effected with  the emphasis on 
the  status  of  the  farming communities which  is  a  particularly significant  hmension 
of the new proposal. 

A.  Coverage of Krieties under Protection 

The  proposed  legislation  provides  that  the  whole  range  of  plants,  including 
extant  and  new  varieties,  would  be  covered.  This  comprehensive  coverage  that  is 
being  proposed  in  the  legislation  as  IPP  and  which  is  extended  to  agriculture  is, 
however, not  in  keeping with  global trends. The &scussion  below indicates that this 
provision  in  the  proposed legislation  does, in  fact, go beyond the  requirements that 
India would have to meet upon  acceding to UPOV ’91. 

Flexibility  in  coverage  has  always  been  adopted  in  order  that  a  better 
understanding of the impact of PBRS on genetic diversity can  be had.  This effect  is a 
concern  that  was  echoed  quite  frequently  in  countries  adopting  this  system  of 
pr~tection.’~ In  keeping  with  this,  UPOV  has  always  maintained  that  varietal 
protection should be  adopted by  Member  countries in  phases.  In  fact,  up  until the 
recent  amendment  in  1991,  comprehensive  coverage  of  all  varieties  was  never  a 
requirement  which  UPOV Members  had  to  meet.  For  instance,  UPOV ’78,  the 
framework  that  the  1991 amendment  has  replaced,  provided  that  any  country,  on 
becoming a party  to  the  Convention had  to  apply the provisions of the  UPOV to at 
least  five  genera or species. Within  a  period  of three years,  the number of genera or 
species  to be included were required  to be  increased to  ten  and afier a further three 

l 3   Paroda (1990). p.  151. 

PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS IN  INDIA 

25 1 

years,  eighteen genera or species had to be brought under  the  ambit of pr0tecti0n.l~ 
In  a  period  of eight years,  at least  twenty-four  genera or species  had to be  covered. 
The  number  of  genera  or  species to  be  included  could be  reduced,  or  the  period 
allowed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  coverage  increased  if  particular  Members  of 
the  UPOV were  unable  to  comply  with  the  stipulations due  to  “special  economic 
and  ecological  cond~tions”.~~ There  was  thus  an  added  flexibility  allowed  under 
UPOV ’78 that Member States could take advantage of. 

UPOV ’91,  on  the  other  hand,  proposed  a  comprehensive  coverage  of  plant 
varieties by  the  Member  States of  the  Union.  But  this  comprehensive coverage  is 
not  an  immedate  requirement. States that  have  been  Members of UPOV ’91 have  a 
five-year  transition  period  to  meet  this  requirement.“  The  new  Members  to  the 
Union,  on  the  other  hand,  are  required  to  protect  fifteen  genera  or  species  at  the 
time  of  accession,  and  within  ten  years  to  meet  the  requirement  of  including  all 
genera and species. 
17 

In  the  context  of  the  above,  it  can  be  said  that  quite  clearly  the  proposed 
legislation  seeks  to  go  beyond  the  requirements  of  UPOV ’91  that  would  be 
applicable  to  India  should  the  country  seek  membership  of  the  Union.  An 
appropriate strategy would have  been to provide a  limited coverage of plant varieties 
in  order  to  understand  the  impact  of  introducing  PBRS not  only  on  the  genetic 
diversity,  and hence  ecology, but  also  on  the farmers as  users  of the protected plant 
material. 

B.  Essentially Derived  Erieties 

The  inclusion  of  the  “essentially  derived  varieties”  (EDVS) in  UPOV ’91  has 
generally been  regarded  as  the single most  important aspect  of the latest amendment 
that  has  been  brought  about  in  the  UPOV. In  introducing  the  above-mentioned 
provision,  the  so-called  “research  exemption”  available  under  UPOV ’78,  which 
allowed  breeders  to  freely  use  protected  varieties  for  research  purposes  and  for 
breeding  new  varieties,  was  sought  to  be  excluded.  This  provision  has  major 
ramifications  for  countries like  India where,  as  mentioned  above, farmer-innovators 
have  been  an  integral part  of the  innovation systems in  the  agricultural sector. And 
quite significantly, the proposed  IncGan legislation seeks to  include  this dimension of 
UPOV ’91.  The  significance  of  includmg  EDVS is  brought  out  in  the  following 
discussion. 

Article  14(5) of  UPOV ’91,  which  provides  for  the  inclusion  of  EDVS of  the 
protected varieties within  the  scope of the rights of the  breeder, seeks  to  strengthen 
the  rights  of the  breeder by  bringing  within  the  purview of protection  “essentially 

Article 4(4) and 4(5) 

l4  Article 4(3). 
l6  Article 3(1). 
Article 3(2). 
17 

252 

THE  

derived  and  certain  other  varieties”  of  the  protected  varieties.  In  introducing  t h s  
provision  it  was  argued  that  the  benefits  that  a  breeder  could  secure were  limited 
since  “research  exemption”  allows  creation  of  a  new  variety  of  plant  by  using 
protected  varieties without  the  authorization  of  the  original breeder.”Article  14(5) 
was thus introduced to ensure that no new variety  could be produced by  use  of  the 
protected varieties by  any means. An EDV has been defined by  UPOV ’91 thus: 

(4 

fii) 
(iii) 

it is predominantly derived fiom the  initial variety, or fiom  a  variety  that 
is  itself predominantly derived fi-om the  initial variety, while retaining the 
expression of the  essential  characteristics that  result  horn  the  genotype or 
combination of genotypes of the initial variety; 
it is clearly distinguishable fiom the initial variety; and 
except  for  the  dfferences  which  result  fiom  the  act  of  derivation,  it 
the  expression  of  the  essential 
conforms  to 
characteristics that result from  the  genotype or combination of  genotypes 
of the initial variety. 

the  initial  variety  in 

Article  14(5)(c) fbrther  provides  a  non-exhaustive  list  of  examples  of  acts  that 
may  result  in  the  essential derivation, including the selection of a natural or  induced 
mutant,  or  of  a  somaclonal variant,  the  selection of  a  variant individual fiom  plants 
of  an  initial  variety,  back-crossing  or  transformation  by  genetic  engineering.  This 
indicates that  all  acts  of breeding, fiom  the  most  conventional to  one  involving the 
use  of  modern  techniques,  would  be  taken  into  consideration  when  determining 
whether or not  a new variety is  “essentially derived”. 

the 

issue 

The  strengthening  of  breeders’  rights  took  place  despite  the  fact  that  several 
countries,  more  prominently  Japan  and  Canada,  had  raised 
that 
identification of EDVS was  controversial, in the Diplomatic Conference leading up  to 
the  adoption  of  the  revised  UPOV These  countries  emphasized  that  prior  to  the 
assigning of  rights  for  an  EDV in  line  with  the  provisions  of  the  Article providing 
such protection, effective guidelines must be laid down for identifjnng such varieties. 
In  this  context  it  needs  to  be  mentioned  that  while  UPOV ’91 took  note  of  t h s  
observation  through  a  decision  to  develop  the  guidelines,  the  proposed  legislation 
shows  no  appreciation  for  such  problems  that  might  arise  in  extending  breeders’ 
rights. 

Introducing the  concept of EDVS raises  several other contentious issues. l9 There 
is  a  view  that  determination of the  such derived varieties would not  be made by  an 
examining office as  a part  of  the  grant of PBRS, but  between plant  breeders,  either 
through  a  mutually arrived  agreement  or  through  litigation.*’  Ths implies that  this 

l8  Article  5(3) allowed  use  of  a  protected variety  as  an  initial  source  of variation  for  the  purposes  of 

creating other varieties. 

‘9  For a  discussion h r n  the perspective  of the seed industry see Smith (1996). 

Greengrass (1993). In  a  subsequent personal communication, the author reported  that the extension of 
the  right  to  cover  essentially  derived  varieties  is  expected  to  be  limited  to  those  varieties  which  take  over 
virtually  the  whole  of the  genome  of the  protected variety.  In matters  of dispute  this  may,  therefore,  require 
scientific evidence, referred to in Cohen, Crespi and Dhar  (forthcoming). 

PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS  IN INDIA 

253 

critical issue  would  be  settled  by  the  relative  strengths  of  the  parties  involved,  an 
eventuahty that  would  not  favour  developing countries like  India  who  have  long 
been  involved in major programmes of plant breeding.21 

C.  Stattcs of Farmers in the Proposed Regime of inteltectuaf  Property  Profecfion 

The  status  of  farmers  in  the  regime  of  IPP  which  recognizes  only  the 
contribution  made  by  the  commercial  plant  breeders  has  been  one  of  the  most 
contentious issues  in  the  process  leadmg  up  to  the  introduction  of  the  legislation. 
Quite inexplicably, the proposed legislation has  given little attention to it. 

Although  the  proposed  legislation  includes  a  clause  on  farmers’ rights,  the 
provision  detailing  this  aspect  merely  provides  what  the  UPOV ’78  allowed  as 
“farmers’ privileges”, reference to which was  made in the earlier section. The rights 
that a farmer would enjoy in the proposed regime of IPP would therefore include his 
“traditional rights to  save,  exchange, share  and  sell  his  farm produce,  including for 
reproductive purposes, of the protected variety.. .”.22  The farmers’ rights so  defined 
are  completely at variance with  the  rights that  he  could enjoy for  the  contribution 
made  by  him  and  his  community  towards  the  development  of  plant  genetic 
resources,  a  dimension  which  was  explicitly  included  in  the  Plant  Varieties  Act 
proposed  in  1994.  This  aspect  of  the  proposed  legislation  has  thus  witnessed 
fundamental changes in  emphasis in  the  recent  proposal; the  extent to which  these 
changes have taken place is brought out in the discussion below. 

The  farmers’ rights  defined  in  the  PVA were  alun  to  those  recognized by  the 
international  community  while  interpreting  the  FAO  Understanding  on  Plant 
Genetic Resources, the  process  of which was  initiated in  1983.23 These  two facets 
were reflected clearly in the objective of the PVA. It was  stated that the PVA was: 

“. . . to  protect  the  rights  of the  developers  of new varieties  to  stimulate investment in 
plant breeding and to  generate  competitiveness in the  field of research and development 
both  in  the  public  and  private  sectors  with  the  ultimate  aim  of  facilitating  access  to 
newly  developed varieties  and  maximizing  agricultural production  and  productivity  in 
the  country.. .” 

The clause further stated that protection of farmers’ and researchers’ rights: 

“. . . will strive to balance the  need for stimulation and incentive to R&D with welfare 
of farmers.” 
The rights that  the PVA proposed for communities and farmers were presented 
incentive  mechanism.24 Thus,  the  “recognition  of  the 

in  the  form  of  an 

21 

For an earlier account of the  plant breeding programmes in India see Mukhejee and Lockwood (1973) 
and  Agrawal  (1980).  More  recent  developments in  this  area  have  been detailed  in  the  annual  reports  of  the 
IndiaF2 Council of Agricultural Research. 

The  International Undertaking on Plant  Genetic  Resources was  adopted  by  Resolution 8/83  of the 

FAO Conference in  1980 see FAO (1989). 

23 For  a  recent  reiteration  of  this  oosition  see  Commission  on  Genetic  Resources  for  Food  and 

Agriylture (19961). 

~~~ 

~ 

The Plant Varieties Act  of 1993, India  (1994). 

254 

THE JOURNAL O F  W O R L D  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

,925 

was 

to  come 

rural  communities  with  sustained  perseverance 

contribution  made  by 
in 
development,  on-farm  innovations,  enrichment  and  conservation  of  plant  genetic 
resources 
through  “rewards  and/or  compensation  to  such 
communities  or  clusters  . . . such  that  rural  communities  may  have  a  stake  in  and 
continue  their  efforts  at  preservation  and  improvement  of  land-races  . . . . 
17  26 
In  a 
similar  vein, 
in  ensuring  conservation, 
improvement  and  availability  of  plant  genetic  resources,  it  was  proposed  that  the 
farmers  were  to  be  granted  the  rights  to  “secure  full  benefits  and  support  in 
continuation of their c~ntribution”.~~ 

in  recognition  of  their  contribution 

The farmers’ rights were spelt out quite unambiguously in a further elaboration. 
A farmer was  to be provided  “. . . additional rights to dispose of his  farm produce as 
he chooses which includes his right to save, use,  exchange, share and sell propagating 
material  or  seed  obtained  or  descended  from  seed  obtained  of  a  protected  variety 
except  sale  of  branded  seed/propagating material  . . .’y28  It  must,  however,  be  said 
that  the  latter  condtion, relating  to  branded  seeddpropagating material,  could have 
implied  a  significant  dilution  of  the  rights  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the  large 
transnational corporations and  their branded  seeds  are  making  inroads into  the  seed 
market. 

However,  with  the  abandoning  of  the  concept  of  farmers’  rights  in  the 
proposed legislation, India  has  ended the  attempts at  evolving an  instrument to  give 
effect to  the  agreed  principle  of  rewarding  farmers  for  their  contribution  to  the 
development of agriculture. Ramifications of this can be  far-reaching  implications at 
the international level, since India is the  only  country which had taken the initiative 
to  evolve  an  instrument  to  put  into  practice  the  FAO  Undertaking  on  Farmers’ 
Rights.  In fact, the singular weakness of  the  FAO Undertakmg is  that, its ratification 
by  the  global  community  notwithstanding,  there  is  no  internationally  accepted 
instrument  through  which  farmers  can  be  provided  economic  reward  for  their 
contribution to agriculture. 

But  while  commercial  plant  breeders  would  be  able  to  exercise  a  substantial 
degree  of  control  over  the  market  for  propagating  material by  obtaining the  PBRS, 
which  was  brought  out  in  the  above  discussion, an  attempt  has  also  been  made in 
the  proposed  legislation  to  ensure  that  the  breeders  do  not  exercise their  rights to 
the  detriment  of the  larger public  interest.  Two  instruments have  been  included  in 
the legislation to  meet  this requirement and these impose limited obligations on the 
rightholders. 

25  Ibid., Clause 22(i). 
26  Id. 
Id. 
27 
28  Ibid.,  Clause 22(i) 

PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS IN  INDIA 

255 

D.  Compulsory  Licences  and  Licences  .fRight 

The  two instruments  that  are  sought  to  be  used  to  meet  the  requirements  of 
the  public  at  large  are  quite  familiar  in  India  for  they  have  constituted  the  vital 
elements of the country’s present Patents Act  (Patents Act of 1970). These provisions 
were  introduced  in  the  Patents  Act  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  patents  granted  in 
I n l a  could be  worked in  the  country  and  that  patents  “are  not  granted merely  to 
enable patentees  to  enjoy  monopoly  for  the  importation  of  the  patented  arti~le.’”~ 
The provision allowing for automatic licences of right  has,  in  particular, been  a  key 
feature  of  the  Patents  Act.  This  provision  was  evolved  in  order  to  prevent  the 
emergence of strong monopolies in  areas  which  are  of vital  importance for human, 
animal and plant life.  Accordlngly, licences of right were  made applicable in the area 
of  chemicals,  includng  food  and  pharmaceuticals,  and  allow  “any  person  who  is 
interested  in  the  workmg  the  patented  invention  [to  obtain]  a  licence  for  the 
purpose  [from the  patentee]  on each terms  as  may  be  mutually agreed upon  . . .’’,30 
at  the  expiration  of  three  years  of  the  grant  of  a  ~ a t e n t . ~ ’  Thus,  while  in  the 
granting of compulsory licences the  Controller  of Patents  was  expected to  examine 
the  capabilities  of  the   applicant^,^'  in  the  case  of  licences  of  right  no  such 
requirement was  provided for in the Patents Act. 

In  a  similar vein,  the proposed legislation on plant varieties protection provides 
for  the  grant  of  compulsory  licences  and  licences  of  right,  essentially  to  protect 
public  interest.  Two  conditions  under  which  compulsory  licences  can  be  granted 
have been specified. These are: 

(i) 

(ii) 

requirements of the  public for  seeds  and propagating material  of a variety 
are not being met;33 and 
production  of  the  seeds  or  planting  material  of  the  protected  variety are 
not  being  facilitated  to  the  fullest  extent  that  is  reasonably  possible 
without  undue delay.34 

Upon  the  fulfilment of the  above  conditions and  expiry of  a  “reasonable period  as 
specified by  the  Central Government from the  grant  of protection”  any  person  can 
apply  for  the  grant  of  a  licence  for  producing  the  protected  plant  varieties.  The 
government can  allow grant of  such licences  if  the  claims  made by  the  applicant  as 
regards violation of public interest by  the rightholder are found to be justified. 

3U 

Ibid., Section 88, sub-clause  (1). 

29 _. Section 83, sub-section  (b). 
3’  The actual procedure for licences of right laid down in Section 87  of the Patents  Act of  1970 provided 
for an  endorsemeniof every process patent “Gth the words  ‘Licence of Right’ . . . &om the expiration-of three 
years  from the date of sealing of the patent  . . .” 
32  Section 85 of the  Patents Act of 1970. 
33 
34  Lack  of production of the seeds of protected varieties to the fullest extent in India has  been defined  to 
include non-availability  on a  commercial  scale  arising  out  of  a  hindrance  provided  by  the  rightholder  which 
necessitates repeated imports of seeds of the protected varieties. 

Includes availability of the seeds and propagating material on reasonable terms. 

256 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The provisions of licences of right have been made applicable to food crops and 
fodder. This is  in  keeping with  the  objectives of not  allowing undue  monopolies to 
emerge in  areas  which  are vital to  human  and  animal life  and which,  as  mentioned 
above, are the central objective of the Patents Act of 1970. 

The two provisions of the proposed legislation dscussed in the foregoing should 
be  seen  as  an  attempt  at  providing  instruments  that  can  be  used  to  balance  the 
substantial  rights  that  the  commercial  plant  breeders  are  expected  to  enjoy.  The 
balance  that  is  sought  is  most  prominently  shown  by  the  provision  on  licences  of 
right.  While,  on the  one hand, the  proposed legislation allows  the  plant  breeders to 
exercise their  rights  over all  plant varieties, the  licence  of right,  on  the  other  hand, 
makes  an attempt to put  some check on the  exercise of the  plant  breeders’ rights in 
the  areas  of  vital  importance  to  human  and  animal  life.  The  functioning  of  the 
legislation  would  alone  inchcate  whether  it  was  an  exercise in  prudence  to  include 
the  essential  food  crops  in  the  proposed  legislation  in  the  first  place  and  then  to 
prevent  exercise of control by  the breeders by providing for the operation of licences 
of right. 

But  despite  its  similarity  with  some  of  the  key  features  of  UPOV ’91,  the 
proposed  legislation  will  have  to  meet  two major  challenges before  the  regime  of 
intellectual property protection  in  agriculture can  finally  be  introduced.  In  the  first 
place,  the  legislation  has  to be  consistent with  the  provisions  of the  Agreement  on 
TRIPS. Secondly, it  has  to  meet  the  demands Gom  the  growing private  sector, and 
particularly  the  foreign  interests  in  the  Indian  seed  industry,  for  an  appropriate 
legislation to protect their interests in plant breeding in the country. 

111.  ARE THE  PROVISIONS OF THE  PROPOSED LEGISLATION CONSISTENT WITH 

THE GATT/WTO REQUIREMENTS? 

The  major  test  of  the  system  of  PBRS that  the  proposed  legislation  would 
introduce  in  India  would  be  the  consistency  of  the  legislation’s  clauses  with  the 
provisions of the  Agreement on TRIPS. The TRIPS forms the basis  of the  regime of 
IPP  which  was  introduced  with  the  formation  of  the  World  Trade  Organization 
(WTO).  The  TRIPS Agreement  represents  a  substantial  move 
the 
harmonization of IPP  standards world-wide,  and it  is  this structure, provided by  thls 
Agreement,  that  the  regimes  of  IPP existing  in  the  WTO Member  countries must 
accept. 

towards 

The norms  for  the  protection  of plant  varieties are  specified in  Article 27.3(b) 
of the  TRIPS, and  although at  first  sight  the  scope of the  relevant  provision  appears 
open  to  interpretation,  in  reabty it  is  quite  well  defined.  The Article  also  provides 
that: 

“. . . Members shall  provide for  the protection  of  plant  varieties  either by  patents  or  by 
an  eJective  sui generis system or by  any combination thereof  . . .” (emphasis added). 

PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS IN  INDIA 

257 

The quahfication made  of the  sui generis  system  that  is  to  be  introduced  as  per  the 
requirements  of Article 27.3(b)  holds  the  key  to  the  adoption of the  fiamework for 
the  system.  At  present  the  only  “effective”  sui  generis  system  existing  for  the 
protection  of plant  varieties is  the  PBR system  defined by  the  UPOV C~nvention.~’ 
Considering its wide acceptance among the developed countries, which have  pushed 
€or  extending  IPP  to  agriculture  in  all  countries,  the  UPOV fiamework  can  be 
considered to conform with  the requirements of Article 27.3(b). 

Furthermore,  while  accepting  the  UPOV fiamework,  countries would  have  to 
conform to UPOV ’91, i.e. the amended fiamework for PBRS adopted in 1991. What 
lends  weight  to  this  argument  is  that  UPOV ’91,  by  February  1997  had  been 
endorsed  by  sixteen  countries36 (the  United  States  was  the  first  to  do  so)  and  is 
increasingly being  considered  as  the  fiamework  towards  which  all  national  systems 
must gravitate.j7 It has  also  been argued that  UPOV ’91  takes  into  consideration the 
recent developments in biotechnology and hence all the state-of-the  art technologies 
in plant breedlng can be  covered by  this  form  of P B K 3 *  It is  therefore necessary  to 
look  at  UPOV ’91  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  system  of  plant  varieties’ 
protection that countries would have  to develop. 

The  provisions  of  the  legislation  that  the  Indian  government  proposes  to 
introduce  should  therefore  be  examined  against  the  provisions  of  UPOV ’91. 
Although  several  of  the  legislation’s  provisions  have  been  set  in  line  with  those  of 
UPOV ’91,  there  are  yet  others  on  which  there  are  major  points  of  departure. 
Among  these  are  provisions  relating  to  the  scope  of  breeders’  rights,  compulsory 
licensing and the term of protection of improved plant varieties. 

The scope of the breeders’ rights provided in the proposed legislation includes: 
(i) production for commercial marketing; 
(ii) offering for sale (of the branded seeds); and 
(iii) marketing of the reproductive or propagative material. 

The scope  of the  breeders’ rights  so  defined bears  similarity with  the  provisions of 
UPOV ’78,  Article  5  of  which  provided  that  the  breeders’  rights  extend  to  the 
following acts involving a protected plant variety: 

(i) production for purposes of commercial marketing; 
(ii) offering for sale; and 
(iii) marketing. 

35 As  at  30  December  1997 the  UPOV Convention had  thirty-five  members. Prior to  1994, UPOV had 
members primarily  from  the  induscralized world,  but  since then  developing countries have  shown urgency to 
join  the  Convention. Between  1994  and  1997,  eleven  countries,  seven  of  them  belonging  to  the  Latin 
American region, accepted membership of UPOV 

to Uppv ’91 by  1995: see, Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (1996b). 

36  UPOV (1997). FAO  sources, on  the  other hand, indicated that  seventeen countries had become parties 
’’  IDRC  (1994). pp. 63-64. 
38 See Boeringer (1992). Commercial plant breeders  have  discussed  at length the advantages that they can 

obtain &om the kamework provided by UPOV ’91, see for example Royon (1996). 

258 

THE JOURNAL  O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

This provision, while indicating that the authorization of the breeder was  required if 
production  was  undertaken  for  commercial  marketing,  implied  that  the  breeder’s 
authorization  was  not  necessary  for  using  seeds  produced  on  the  farm.  It  is  this 
above  interpretation  that  gave  rise  to  what  became  commonly  known  as  the 
“farmers’ privileges”, which were discussed  in the earlier section. 

UPOV ’91, on the  other  hand,  provides for  the  breeders’ rights  to  be  far  more 
pervasive.  This has  been attempted by  severely restricting the freedom of the farmers 
to use  propagating material hitherto  permitted  under UPOV ’78. Accordingly, under 
Article 14(9) of UPOV ’91, breeders rights are to include the following acts: 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 

production or reproduction (multiplication); 
conhtioning for the purpose of propagation; 
offering for sale; 
selling or other  marketing; 
exporting; 
importing; 
stocking for any of the purposes referred to above. 

The  rights  of  the  breeder  have  thus  been  extended  to  cover  all  acts  pertaining  to 
production  and  reproduction  of  the  propagating  material  on  which  his  rights  have 
been  established. The scope of protection  therefore  leaves  virtually no  possibility  of 
farmers re-using  seeds without  authorization from the breeder,  as was  the  case under 
UPOV ’78.  Nominal  scope  for  exception  to  breeders’  rights  have,  however,  been 
provided under Article  15.2 as  follows: 

“. . . each  Contracting  Party  [to UPOV ’911  may,  within  reasonable limits  and  subject  to 
the  legitimate  interests  of the  breeder,  restrict the breeder’s  right in relation 
the  safeguarding  of 
to any variety in  order  to permit farmers to use  for propagating purposes, on their own 
holdings, the product  of the harvest  which  they have  obtained by  planting, on their own 
holdings, the protected variety.. .” (emphasis added). 

The new  provisions thus  allow farmers to  re-use  the  protected  material  only  if  the 
“legitimate interests of the breeder”  are taken  care  of-the 
legitimate interests being 
the royalty  that the breeder should be paid for re-using  the seeds. 

The recent  amendment of the PBR system brought  about by  the U.S.  Congress 
after  the  United  States  ratified  UPOV ’91,  pointedly  indicates  the  restrictions  that 
farmers  could  face  in  the  new  PBR system. Through  this  new  legislation, the  U.S. 
Congress has  put  limits on the  scope of “farmers’ exemption” under  the  U.S.  Plant 
Variety  Protection  Act  (the U.S.  equivalent of  PBRS). According  to  this  legislation, 
farmers  would  be  allowed  to  re-plant  the  seeds  on  their  own  farm  but  would  be 
restricted  fiom  selling  them  for  reproductive  purposes  to  their  farm  neighbours 
without having to pay  royalties  or asking permission for the same.39 

Thus,  while  UPOV ’91  has  sought  to  restrict  the  freedom  that  the  farmers 
would  henceforth  enjoy  through  its  latest  amendment,  the  proposed  legislation  in 

39 

For elaboration see Butler (1996), Smith (1996) and Hamilton (1996). 

PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS IN INDIA 

259 

India  has  provided  for  farmers’ privileges  akin  to  those  available  under  UPOV ’78. 
This  divergence  from  UPOV ’91  could  be  the  single  most  important  aspect  that 
could arise as  the proposed legislation is implemented. 

What  needs mentioning in  this  context is  that, although  the  global community 
has  not  fallen short  of takmg  initiatives to  recognize  the  contribution  made by  the 
trahtional  farrner~,~’ commensurate  efforts  have  not  been  made  at  putting  these 
initiatives into  an  operational  form.  The  ability  of  the  regime  of  IPP  to  provide 
legitimacy to  the  contributions made by  the  traditional farming communities would 
alone lead to a more effective development of agriculture in developing countries. 

The  provisions  relating  to  compulsory  licensing  appearing  in  the  proposed 
legislation that give “overriding priority” to public interest are, as  mentioned  above, 
antithetical  to  the  IPP  framework  as  proposed  in  the  Agreement  of  TRIPS. In  the 
latter,  the  rights  of  the  owner  of  intellectual  property  are  given  primacy  in  no 
uncertain terms, as  is  clear from Article 30 that  relates  to patents. According to  this 
Article: 

“. . . limited  exceptions  [may  be  given]  to  the  exclusive  rights  conferred  by  a  patent, 
provided  that  such  exceptions  do  not  unreasonably conflict with  a  normal  exploitation 
of  the  patent  and  do  not  unreasonably  prejudice  the  legitimate  interests  of  the  patent 
owner, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.” 
Further,  the  provisions  of  the  proposed  legislation  that  lay  down  strict 
requirements for making available the protected material to members of the public at 
reasonable  prices  through  the  grant  of  compulsory  licences,  are  hametrically 
opposite to the provisions of both  the UPOV ’91 and the TRIPS Agreement. Neither 
of these  allow  for  the  use  of the  mechanism  of compulsory licensing. The issue  of 
compulsory  licensing  was  considered  by  the  Revision  Conference  leading  up  to 
UPOV ’91 at  the  outset, but  was  eventually reje~ted.~’ In  a similar vein,  the issue  of 
allowing  the  use  of  compulsory  licenses  was  raised  as  one  of  the  major  areas  of 
contention  during  the  Uruguay  Round  negotiations,  particularly  in  relation  to 
patents. However, it was  eventually settled in favour of the patentee who  now is free 
&om undertakmg any obligation to make  his  patented/protected  material available to 
the public at reasonable prices. 

The other  point  of  difference between  the  proposed  legislation and  UPOV ’91 
arises  as  regards  the  term  of  protection.  The  proposed  legislation, in  providing  a 
term  of protection of fifteen years  for new varieties from the date of registration and 

40  Two  of  the  main  attempts  towards  this  end have  been  the  FAO’S (Food and Agriculture Organization) 
recognition  of the  farmers’ rights  and  the  UNESCO/WIPO (United  Nations Economic, Scientific and  Cultural 
Organization/World  Intellectual  Property  Organization)  initiative  to  evolve  a  treaty  for  the  protection  of 
folklore, preservation of biodiversity  being  regarded as  an  integral part  of folklore:  see  FAO  (1989  and  1995) 
and UNESCO (1984 and  1985). 
41  Although  UPOV ’91  does  not  contain provisions that  allow for  the  grant  of  compulsory licences,  the 
Model  Law  on the  Protection of Plant  Varieties  prepared  by  the  Urov  Secretariat based  on UPOV ’91, does 
include a  provision on  compulsory licensing.  However,  given the  positions regarding compulsory licences  that 
have been  taken in the recent negotiations, both in the  UPOV and GATTIWTO, the  future  of this instrument is 
certainly in doubt. 

260 

THE  

eighteen  years  for  trees  and  vines,  provides  a  shorter  term  than  stipulated  under 
UPOV ’91 where  the  corresponding terms are  at least  twenty and twenty-five  years, 
respectively. 

There  are,  thus,  several  areas  where  the  provisions  of  the  proposed  legislation 
appear  inconsistent with  those  of the  TRIPS Agreement, which,  as  discussed  above, 
require adoption of the UPOV ’91. 

CONCLUSIONS 

Indan  agriculture is  at  a  crossroads  as  the  government prepares  to  bring  forth 
legislation for the introduction of intellectual property rights in this sector. Hitherto, 
India,  like  most  developing  countries,  had  kept  the  agricultural  sector  outside  the 
domain  of intellectual property  protection,  but  this  situation  has  changed following 
the  commitment,  undertaken  by  the  government  under  the  TRIPS Agreement,  to 
extend IPRS to encompass plants. 

The proposed legislation, the  second that  the  government has  produced in  less 
than four years,  seeks to provide PBRS in addition to the  commercial plant breeders’ 
rights,  which  they  can  use  to  protect  all varieties  of plants.  It  is  proposed  that  the 
rights  of  the  breeders  would  extend  to  the  “essentially derived  varieties”  as  well. 
These two features of the proposed legislation have made it simdar to the framework 
of PBRS currently provided by  the UPOV Convention through UPOV ’91. 

Although  the  government  has  tried  to  address  the  larger  public  interest  by 
introducing  instruments  that  can  limit  the  exercise  of  monopoly  by  the  plant 
breeders, it  is  the  interests  of the  farmers in the  proposed  IPP  regime  in  agriculture 
that  have  been  given  short  shrift.  This  has  arisen  primarily  because  the  issue  of 
farmers’ rights  arising out  of  their  contribution  to  the  development of  agricultural 
systems,  which  has  been  an  integral  part  of  the  on-going  debate  on  PBRS in  the 
country, has  not  been  considered in the proposed legislation. In  so  doing, India has, 
in  fact,  given  up  the  initial  moves  it  had  made  to  provide  a  legal  basis  for  the 
recognition  of  the  farmers’  contribution  to  agriculture  that  the  global  community 
has  accorded through the FAO’S International Undertaking on Farmers’ Rights. 

Restoring  the  balance  of  rights  by  providmg  due  recognition  to  both  farmers 
and  the modern  plant breeders in  a  regime  of intellectual property protection needs 
to be  attempted in the larger interests of the development of agriculture in a farmer- 
dominated system. 

PLANT BREEDERS’ RIGHTS IN INDIA 

26 1 

References 

Development, Vol.  9, No.  4. 

Agrawal, R.C.,  1980: Seed  Technology, Oxford & IBH  Publishing Co., New Delhi. 
Biggs,  Stephen, and Edward J. Clay,  1981: Sources  oflnnovation in Agricultural  Technology, World 
Boeringer, Dirk,  1992: Developments in Biotechnology and  the  1991 Act of the  UPOV Convention, 
Seminar on the  Nature  of and the  Rationale for the  Protection  of Plant Varieties  under 
the UPOV Convention, UPOV, Geneva. 

Butler, L.J.,  1996: Plant  Breeders’  Rights in the  United States:  Update ofa  1983 Study, in van Wijk 

and Jaffe (eds.), op.  cit. 

Cohen, Joel, Stephan Crespi, and Biswajit Dhar, forthcoming: Should  I Seek  Legal Protection for 
Commission  on  Genetic  Resources  for  Food  and  Agriculture,  1996a:  Revision  of  the 

my Reseanh  Results? in Tabor, Janssen  and Bruneau  (eds.) op.  cit. 

International  Undertaking, FAO,  Leipzig. 

Idem,  1996b: Recent  International  Developments  of Relevance  to  the  Drdt  Code of Conduct for Plant 
FAO,  1989:  Interpretation  of  the  International  Undertaking  on  Plant  Genetic  Resources,  c  89/24, 

Biotechnology, FAO, Leipzig. 

Rome. 

Rome. 

Idem,  1990: Plant  Breeders’  Rights  in India: A Report  to the  Government of India,  T c ~ / I m / 0 0 5 2 ,  

Idem,  1993:  Technical  Co-operation  Programme,  Plant  Breeders’  Rights:  India,  Terminal Statement 
Prepared for the Government of India by  the  Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations, AG:TCP/IND/OO~~, Rome. 

Idem,  1995: Recent  International  Developments  of Relevance  to  the  Drdt  Code of C o n d a f o r  Plant 

Government of India, Ministry of Law and Justice, 1986: The Patents Act,  1970 (as on 15 July 

Biotechnology, cPG~-6/95/ 15. 

1986), Delhi. 

Greengrass, Barry, 1993: The 1991 Act of the  UPOV Convention, Seminar on the Nature  of and 

Rationale  for  the  Protection  of  Plant  Varieties  under  the  UPOV Convention,  UPOV, 
Geneva. 
of  Recent  Developments  in  Plant-Related  Intellectual 

Hamilton,  Neil  D.,  1996:  Possible  E$ects 

Property Rights  in the  United States, in van Wijk and Jaffe (eds.), op. cit. 

IDRC,  1994:  People,  Piants  and  Patents:  The  Impact  of  Intellectual  Property  on  Tlade,  Plant 

Biodivenity and  Rural  Society, report prepared by  the Crucible Group, Ottawa. 

Indian Council of Agricultural Research,  1964: Agriculture  in Ancient  India,  New Delhi. 
Idem: Annual Reports, various years. 
M.S.  Swaminathan  Research  Foundation,  1994:  Methodologies  for  Recognising  the  Role  of 
Znfmal  Innovation  in  the  Consewation  and  Utilization  of  Plant  Genetic  Resources:  A n  
Interdisciplinary Dialogue,  Madras. 

Mukherjee,  PK.,  and  Brian  Lockwood,  1973:  High  Yielding  brieties  Programme  in  India:  A n  

Assessment, in Shand (ed.), op. cit. 

Paroda,  R.S.,  1990:  Plant  Variety  Protection-Related 
Issues  in  the  Indian  Context,  in  Seed 
Royon,  Reni,  1996: Licensing of  Protected  brieties: International  Practice,  in van  Wijk  and J S e  

Association of India, op.  cit. 

Sahai, Suman,  1994:  Government  Legislation  on  Plant  Breeders’  Rights,  Economic  and  Political 

Seed Association of India,  1990: Plant  Eriety  Protection:  Pros  and  Cons, New Delhi. 
Sehgal,  Suri,  1996:  Biotechnology  Heralds  a  Major  Restructuring  of  the  Global  Seed  Industry, 

(eds.), op.  cit. 

Weekly, Val. mix, Issue 26. 

Diversity, Vol.  12, No. 6. 

262 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Shand, Hope,  1994:  U. S. Congress Restricts Farmers’  Rights,  Seedling, October. 
Shand, R.T. (ed.), 1973:  Technical  Change  in  Asian  Agriculture,  Australian National  University 
Sharma, Devinder,  1994: GATT and India:  The Politics  of Agriculture,  Konarak Publications Pvt. 

Press, Canberra. 

Ltd., Delhi. 

Shiva, Vandana,  1996:  Agricultural  Biodivenity,  Intellectual  Property  Rights  and  Farmers’  Rights, 

Economic and Political Weekly, Vol.  xxxi,  Issue 25. 

Smith, Stephan, 1996: Farmers’  Privilege,  Breeders’  Exemption  and  the  Essentially  Derived  krieties 

Concept:  Status Report  on  Current Developments, in van Wijk  and Jaffh  (eds.),  op.  cit. 

Sourcebook, ISNAR,  The Hague. 

and  Other Prejudicial Action,  Paris. 

Folklore  against  Illicit Exploitation  and other Prejudicial Action, Paris. 

Tabor,  Steve,  Willem  Janssen,  and  Hilarion  Bruneau  (eds.),  forthcoming:  Research  Finance 
UNESCO 1984: D r u j  Treaty for  the  Protection  of  Expressionr  of  Folklore Against  nlicit  Exploitation 
Idem,  1985: UNESCO/ WIPO Model Provisions for  National Laws for  the Protection  of Expressions of 
Idem,  1993:  Seminar on  the  Nature of  and  Rationale for  the  Protection  of  Plant  Varieties  under  the 
Idem,  1992: Records of  the  Diplomatic  Conference for  the Revision  of International  Convention for the 
Idem,  1996: Model Law  on  the  Protection of New  Wrieties  of  Plants,  Geneva. 
Idem,  1997: States Party  to  the International  Convention for  the Protection  of New  Varieties of Plants: 

UPOV Convention,  held in Budapest, Hungary. 
Protection of New  hieties of Plants,  Geneva. 

Status on  February  1, 1997, Geneva. 

van  Wijk, Jeroen,  and  Walter J S e   (eds.),  1996: Intellectual  Property  Rights  and  Agriculture  in 
Developing  Countries,  proceedings of  a  seminar on  the  impact of plant  breeders’ rights in 
developing countries held in SantaFi de Bogoti,  Colombia. 


