The  (2009) Vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 175–197

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00364.x

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements: Is
the US Strategy a Failure?

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin
Universit ´e Libre de Bruxelles

This article examines the current wave of US bilateral agreements with respect to their
strategic and political value at the plurilateral level. The US government has explicitly
recognized its objective of leveraging bilateral agreements in order to inﬂuence regional and
multilateral negotiations. Although it may be too early to assess the full effectiveness of this
US strategy, the article argues that there are clear signs that the exploitation of bilateral
agreements will not independently achieve the goal of strengthening plurilateral patent
norms. This ﬁnding is supported by an assessment of six potential roads from bilateralism
to plurilateralism: chain reaction, pressure for inclusion, coalition building, emulation, legal
interpretation and adherence. The assertion that bilateral trade deals have a huge impact on
international patent law making, made both by proponents and critics of the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights-Plus, is unsubstantiated. The author
concludes that the US Government Accountability Ofﬁce and Congress are justiﬁed in
questioning whether the negotiation of these bilateral agreements, at least in the realm of
intellectual property law, is a wise investment of US Trade Representative’s resources.

Keywords bilateralism; multilateralism; United States; TRIPs-Plus

Bilateralism in the International Patent Regime

The move towards bilateralism in international patent law making is controversial.
Bilateral agreements typically provide broader and stronger patent standards
compared with their multilateral equivalents, such as the Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs). These so-called ‘‘TRIPs-
Plus agreements’’ are pushing the frontier of the international patent system.

Although the European Union (EU), Switzerland and the European Free Trade
Association are all engaged in such bilateral negotiations with developing countries
across the globe (El Said, 2007), the United States is the most active country on the
bilateral front since TRIPs entered into force. Following the signing of TRIPs in
1994, the Clinton administration signed partial trade agreements or bilateral
agreements speciﬁcally devoted to intellectual property (IP) with Jamaica, Lithua-
nia, Latvia, Trinidad and Tobago, Cambodia, Laos, Nicaragua and Vietnam. In
2002, the Bush administration obtained Trade Promotion Authority from the
Republican Congress. Thereafter, the United States signed full-ﬂedged free-trade
agreements (FTAs) that contained IP chapters with Singapore, Chile, Central
American countries, Dominican Republic, Australia, Morocco, Bahrain, Oman,

r 175

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Peru, Colombia, Panama and Korea, and is presently negotiating FTAs with
Malaysia and the United Arab Emirates.

Theorists have suggested that bilateralism is used by economically powerful
states as their control over multilateral negotiation declines (Caporaso, 1992,
pp. 599–632; Greenaway and Milner, 2001, p. 162; Yarbrough and Yarbrough,
1987, p. 23). Introducing broader and stronger patent protection norms is con-
sidered more easily achieved through bilateral agreements than in the multilateral
fora. Asymmetry in economic power presents powerful states with an alternative
path in creating desired norms that they would not be able to negotiate successfully
at the multilateral level.

Several publications have already denounced this approach in the creation of
patent norms (Abbott, 2006; Fink and Reichenmiller, 2005; Krikorian and Szym-
kowiak, 2007; Kuanpoth, 2006; Mayne, 2004; Price, 2004; Roffe, 2004; Roffe and
Spennemann, 2006; Rossi, 2006; Vivas-Eugui, 2003). The increased pace at which
bilateral agreements have been concluded in the past decade is thought to under-
mine the legitimacy of multilateralism. The shift to bilateral negotiations when
multilateral negotiations are gridlocked has been described as a ‘‘grotesque’’ means
for making gains that could not be achieved at multilateral negotiating tables
(GRAIN, 2001, p. 7).

Proponents and critics of bilateral agreements agree on one point: their
conclusion is not, for the US government, a goal in itself, but a means towards
increased revenues for patent holders. One can wonder, then, why the United States
has not signed bilateral agreements with the countries that most seriously threaten
the interests of American IP Right (IPR) holders, such as China, Russia, Egypt and
India. These and other countries are considered by the US administration as major
counterfeiting countries and have been placed on the US ‘‘301 Priority Watch List’’
(USTR, 2007). Most of them were put under pressure and have agreed to sign
bilateral memoranda of understanding on IP with the United States. However, none
of them were invited by the US government to sign a formal bilateral treaty, legally
binding in international law.

It is also surprising that, in the post-TRIPs period, the United States has not
pursued bilateral negotiations with its major economic partners. With the high
volume of trade and investment ﬂows between developed countries, even small
discrepancies in patent standards could represent large transaction costs. However,
to date, the United States has not negotiated harmonized patent standards with the
EU or Japan outside of multilateral fora. These omissions beg the question as to
whether US investment in time, political capital and human resources in creating
complex legal structures with countries like Dominican Republic and Bahrain,
which are neither major trading partners nor major counterfeiters, is worthwhile?
Peter Drahos (2003) explains the US strategy by locating the current shift to
bilateralism within a cycle of negotiation. Drahos suggests that bilateral agreements
are supposed to lead to regional agreements, which ultimately support increased
protection that states previously did not agree to at the multilateral level. Drahos

176

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

emphasizes that the United States is in the bilateral stage of this cycle, seeking to use
bilaterals in a manner that will ultimately ‘‘ratchet up’’ IP protections at a multi-
lateral level. Santo Domingo and Port of Spain are stopovers on the way to Paris,
Moscow and Beijing. Seen from this perspective, a bilateral agreement with the
smallest economy among World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) mem-
bers could provide a major strategic value.

In fact, the US government has explicitly recognized its objective of leveraging
bilateral agreements in order to inﬂuence regional and multilateral agreements. This
strategy was called ‘‘competitive liberalization’’ by the former US Trade Representa-
tive (USTR), Robert Zoellick: ‘‘By moving forward simultaneously on multiple fronts,
the United States can . . . create a fresh political dynamic by putting free trade on the
offensive’’ (US Government Accountability Ofﬁce [GAO], 2004, p. 57). A GAO report
later clariﬁed that one of the key criteria in selecting an FTA partner was its capacity
to inﬂuence other countries (2004, pp. 7–11). Towards this end, the United States has
spread its geographical breadth, enabling it to establish regional ‘‘poles’’ that can
provide bases that act as catalysts for regional or multilateral initiatives (GAO, 2004,
pp. 8–9). As a result, in the 2 years that followed the adoption of the Trade Promotion
Authority (TPA) by Congress, the US signed FTAs with countries in Asia, Oceania,
Africa, the Middle East, South America and Central America.

The historical development of international IP law supports the argument that
bilateral agreements can serve as building blocks for subsequent plurilateral
(regional or multilateral) agreements. Bilateral IP agreements that were negotiated
in the nineteenth century acted as models for drafting provisions of the Paris
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property in 1883 (Gervais, 2002,
pp. 234–5; Okediji, 2004, p. 133; Yu, 2004, p. 14). A century later, US bilateral
negotiations under the so-called ‘‘Super 301’’ mechanism, threatening developing
countries of unilateral trade sanctions, also played a crucial role in reaching US
objectives in TRIPs (Drahos, 2003, p. 104; Sell, 2003, p. 108.)

This article offers a preliminary examination of the current wave of US bilateral
agreements with respect to their strategic value at the plurilateral level. Although it
may be too early to assess the full effectiveness of the US strategy, it argues that
there are clear signs that the exploitation of bilateral agreements will not indepen-
dently achieve the goal of strengthening multilateral patent norms. Thus far, more
than a decade of active bilateralism has not produced preferred results for the
United States. This article therefore argues that the assertion that bilateral trade
deals have a huge impact on international patent law making, both by proponents
and critics, is unsubstantiated.

This conclusion is supported by an assessment of six potential roads from
bilateralism to plurilateralism. First, bilateral agreements can create a chain
reaction under which developing countries fall under US norms like dominos.
Second, they could attract new parties and progressively evolve toward plurilateral
agreements. Third, they can build coalitions for multilateral negotiations. Fourth,
they can create success stories that can be used to promote and justify US patent

r 177

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

norms in multilateral settings. Fifth, their provisions can offer tools for interpreta-
tion of existing multilateral agreements or serve as the basis for new international
customary norms. Sixth, they could promote accession to existing multilateral
agreements. Our analysis shows that only this last use of bilateralism—the
reinforcement of existing multilateral agreements—has succeeded so far.

The Domino Effect

The broadest goal of bilateralism in the US playbook is to generate a measurable
effect beyond the targeted country. One way to achieve this goal is the creation of a
chain reaction, whereby bilateral agreements create a domino effect that transplants
US patent norms beyond the original members. As the former USTR Robert
Zoellick explained, the ‘‘idea is to start out with the leading reformers . . . and then
try to connect others to it over time’’ (Yu, 2003). The hope is for the new partners to
actively negotiate similar provisions in their treaties with third countries. An
example of a chain reaction through bilateral agreements from the pre-TRIPs
period is the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) requirement that
Mexico give effect to the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of
Plants (UPOV, 2008) Convention. Subsequent to signing on to NAFTA, Mexico
imposed the same requirement on Bolivia, a non-party to the UPOV Convention.
While a chain reaction would evidently beneﬁt the United States, the motiva-
tions for its partners to transplant US patent norms to third countries are less
obvious. Two such incentives are suggested. The ﬁrst results from the TRIPs Most
Favored Nation provision (article 4), which states that members must offer
‘‘immediately and unconditionally’’ any enhanced protections to nationals of any
other member of the World Trade Organization (WTO). Instead of offering these
enhanced protections without any concession from third countries, partner states
might try to conclude reciprocal agreements in order to maintain a level playing
ﬁeld and prevent neighbouring countries from gaining a competitive advantage as a
result of weaker patent protection.

Second, they might be subject to a phenomenon described by Ikenberry and
Kupchan as ‘‘socialization by external inducements’’ (1990, p. 291). This socializa-
tion, originating from the institutionalized cooperation formalized in bilateral
agreements, leads the elites of developing countries to believe that US norms are
in their best interest. This change in belief can result from technical assistance,
capacity-building programmes or the frequent contacts with foreign authorities that
usually follow the signature of an FTA. Tellingly, the US government has noted
that ‘‘more and more of our trading partners are coming to understand that their
future growth and development depends in large part on . . . strong intellectual
property protection’’ (Larson, 2002).

The United States could reasonably have expected that signing bilateral treaties
with certain chosen partners would have an important chain reaction potential. As
shown in Table 1, bilateral treaties negotiated during the last decade coincided with

178

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Table 1: Regional and Bilateral Discussions on IP Involving US Partners

US bilateral partners

Jamaica (1994)
Latvia (1994)
Trinidad and Tobago
(1994)
Laos (1997)

Nicaragua (1998)
Vietnam (2000)

Jordan (2000)
Singapore (2003)

IP cooperation in process when
the US bilateral agreement was
signed

Caribbean Community

Caribbean Community

Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Framework
Agreement on IPR

Asia Paciﬁc Economic
Cooperation (APEC) (Osaka
Action Agenda) ASEAN
Framework Agreement on IPR

APEC (Osaka Action
Agenda) ASEAN Framework
Agreement on IPR

Chile (2003)

APEC (Osaka Action Agenda)

Central America and
Dominican Republic
(2004)
Australia (2004)

Morocco (2004)

Bahrain (2004)

Caribbean Community

APEC (Osaka Action Agenda)

Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Joint Committee with
EFTA

Oman (2006)

GCC Joint Committee with
EFTA

IP negotiation in process when the
US bilateral agreement was signed

Agreement with EFTA
Free Trade Agreement of the
Americas (FTAA)

FTAA

FTA with EFTA
FTA with Mexico FTA with
Canada India-Singapore
Comprehensive Economic
Agreement FTA with Korea FTA
with JordanTreaty between
ASEAN and China FTA with
Japan Trans-Paciﬁc Strategic
Economic Partnership (SEP)
Agreement
FTAA FTA with EFTA, article
46 FTA with Korea FTA with
Japan Trans-Paciﬁc SEP
Agreement
FTAA FTA with Canada

FTA with Singapore FTA with
Thailand
Agadir Agreement FTA with
Turkey Middle East Free Trade
Initiative
Treaty between GCC and the
European Community (EC)
Treaty between GCC and India
Middle East Free Trade Initiative
Treaty between GCC and the
EC Treaty between GCC and
India

r 179

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

US bilateral partners

Colombia (2006)
Panama (2007)

Republic of Korea
(2007)
Peru (2007)

Table 1: continued

IP cooperation in process when
the US bilateral agreement was
signed

APEC (Osaka Action Agenda)

Joint Committee with EFTA
Andean Community APEC
(Osaka Action Agenda)

Source: Original to this article

IP negotiation in process when the
US bilateral agreement was signed

FTA with Chile
FTA with Singapore FTA with
Chile
FTA with EU FTA with ASEAN

FTA with Canada FTA with Chile

other regional or bilateral discussions on IP from which the United States was
absent.

Despite the extensive efforts devoted to using bilateral partners as allies in the
creation of a chain reaction, few subsequent dominoes have fallen for the United
States. Indeed, US partners are not reproducing patent provisions from their US
bilateral agreements in agreements with their own bilateral or regional trading
partners. For example, Australia, a bilateral partner of the United States, concluded
FTAs with Singapore and Thailand, which merely reafﬁrm the parties’ commitment
to TRIPs. Singapore, another US partner, also refrained from promoting US
standards. Its FTAs with New Zealand and Jordan simply refer to TRIPs, its FTAs
with Korea and Panama contain no substantive standards on patent law and its
FTA with Japan only provides for an information-exchange process on the
preferred IP law. Similarly, Chile’s FTAs with Korea and Japan include detailed
provisions on marks and geographical indications, but no mention is made of
patents, and its FTAs with EFTA and China simply refer to TRIPs. Finally, the
Trans-Paciﬁc SEP Agreement among Chile, New Zealand, Singapore and Brunei
Darussalam includes detailed provisions on marks and geographical indications
but, again, patents are not mentioned. The list of US allies that failed to reproduce
patent provisions with their own trading partners suggests that the use of bilater-
alism to promote the formation of chain links is ineffective. This objective was not,
however, the only one pursued by the United States, as will be seen in the next
section.

The Club Effect

Bilateral trade agreements could create a ‘‘pressure for inclusion’’ (Lawrence, 1996).
This pressure acts as an incentive for third parties to join existing treaties to beneﬁt
from privileged trade access to the US market. It originates from a prisoner
dilemma situation where developing countries believe they secure gains from acting

180

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

collectively. As a group and in absolute terms, they are better off rejecting bilateral
trade agreements that include TRIPs-Plus provisions. However, a breach in the
alliance compels neighbouring and competing countries to join the existing one.
Ultimately, all the other developing countries could be forced to follow in order to
catch up with this comparative trade advantage (Baldwin, 1997; Guzman, 1998).

Moreover, it is thought that countries without a trade partnership with the
United States are more likely to endorse American norms if they are already
adopted by other countries. The pre-existence of an agreement is a reassuring signal
that joining the club is rational and will not seriously harm the economy. For
example, in the 1980s, Mexico was among a number of countries that offered weak
or no IP protection for pharmaceutical products. Once becoming party to NAFTA,
however, Mexico sent letters of reassurance to developing countries encouraging the
acceptance of US norms in the context of the TRIPs negotiation (Rein, 2001,
p. 382).

In this context, the US government expected that third countries might
eventually want to join its bilateral agreements. In particular, it hoped that treaties
concluded with Morocco, Oman and Bahrain would lead to a large free trade area
in the Middle East before 2013 (USTR, 2003). The preambles of these three FTAs
highlight that the parties are ‘‘afﬁrming their support for the participation of the
Parties in the establishment of an expanded free trade area in the Middle East that
would contribute to economic liberalization and development in the region’’. The
United States had similar designs in parlaying country-level FTAs in the Western
hemisphere into a regional FTAA (Hufbauer and Kotschwar, 1998). Even the
agreements with Singapore and Korea refer to the goal of enhancing regional
integration in the Asia-Paciﬁc region. Not surprisingly, several bilateral agreements
explicitly permit the adhesion of other countries or groups of countries (see Central
American FTA (CAFTA)–DR–US FTA, article 22.6; US–Australia FTA, article
23.1; US–Bahrain FTA, article 21.41; US–Morocco FTA, article 22.5; US–Oman
FTA, article 24.2(1); US–Peru TPA, article 23.5; US–Singapore FTA, article 21.6).
Since these bilateral agreements may eventually be transformed into regional
agreements if third countries decide to adhere, it is important to ﬁx the US-style
IP protection from the outset.

However, stories of states caught in a prisoner dilemma are more common in
theorists’ models than in real life. No third countries have ever acceded to an
existing bilateral agreement. At best, some countries have initiated negotiations
with the United States after a neighbouring country signed a bilateral agreement
(such as Trinidad and Tobago after the signature of an IP agreement between the
United States and Jamaica) or joined ongoing negotiations (such as Dominican
Republic as Central American countries were negotiating with the United States).
The objective of a Middle East Agreement or an FTAA based on the US FTA
model is far from being reached. Indeed, existing regional trade fora often grumble
when one of their members signs a bilateral agreement with the US. The Arab GCC
(AGCC), for example, urged Bahrain to denounce its FTA with the US because of

r 181

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

its negative effect on the future cooperation and development of the AGCC (El
Said, 2007, p. 167). Existing bilateral agreements will likely remain in their current
form rather than expanding their parties and evolving toward plurilateralism.

The Coalition Effect

Bilateral agreements can also be used to create strategic alliances of like-minded
countries in multilateral settings. From this perspective, bilateral agreements act
cumulatively towards a single beneﬁcial objective. By persuading more countries to
accept its stringent IPR norms, the United States hopes that a critical mass of
countries in multilateral fora, namely the WTO and WIPO, will support new
international standards (Krikorian and Szymkowiak, 2007). This is consistent with
the USTR observation that the United States’ ‘‘very best allies for a strong Doha
Round have been current and former [free trade] partners’’ (Rayasam, 2006, p. 22).
By expanding and strengthening its coalition, the United States simultaneously
introduces division in developing countries’ coalitions, such as the African Group,
the Mega-diverse Countries and the Friends of Development (GAO, 2004, p. 9).
Following this line of argument, some academics, such as Mohammed El Said,
worry that bilateral agreements will result in breaking the resistance of developing
countries in Geneva ‘‘since countries which are committing themselves to TRIPs-
Plus provisions are not able to further object, under the multilateral forum for
additional IPRs protection, once discussions on such matters are brought back to
the multilateral paradigm’’ (2007, p. 164).

Evidence of the American strategy is to be found in the substance of the
bilateral agreements themselves. The Australia–US FTA, for example, requires
parties to participate in multilateral negotiation: ‘‘each Party shall endeavor to
participate in international patent harmonization efforts, including the WIPO fora
addressing reform and development of the international patent system’’ (article
19.9.14). The United States also carefully introduces into its bilateral agreements
provisions, which are, at that juncture, actively being negotiated at the multilateral
level. A key example surrounds the negotiations of the Substantive Patent Law
Treaty (SPLT) and the attempts to ﬁnd a common deﬁnition of ‘‘industrial
applicability’’. In May 2003, three rival deﬁnitions were still on the negotiating
table and the US delegation was supporting one extracted from the US Patent and
Trademark Ofﬁce (USPTO) Utility Examination Guidelines (SCLP 9th session,
2003, SCP/9/5). Alongside these SPLT negotiations, the US signed FTAs with the
Central American countries, Australia and Morocco, which stated that ‘‘[e]ach
Party shall provide that a claimed invention is industrially applicable if it has a
speciﬁc, substantial, and credible utility’’
(CAFTA-DR–US, article 15.1.10;
US–Australia, article 17.9.13; US–Morocco, article 15.10.11). By propagating its
own deﬁnition of utility through FTAs, the United States attempted to secure allies
for SPLT negotiations.

182

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Further, the United States made at least one direct appeal to its partners for
supporting a multilateral forum. In 2006, the United States requested that its
partners support its position on a resolution at the World Health Organization’s
(WHO) Intergovernmental Working Group on Public Health, Innovation and
Intellectual Property Rights. The resolution mandated the working group to devise
a plan for implementing the World Health Assembly’s Resolution 59.24, on
‘‘securing an enhanced and sustainable basis for needs-driven, essential health
research and development relevant to diseases that disproportionately affect devel-
oping countries’’. The United States expressed concerns, in communications to its
FTA partners, that the working group was stepping outside of its mandate and that
the WTO was a ‘‘more appropriate forum’’ (Gerhardsen, 2006).

Another indication of US reliance on its bilateral partners as allies is the
negotiation of the FTAA. The expectation of support was apparent, given that the
United States considered a commitment to FTAA negotiations an important
criterion for its selection of trade partners (GAO, 2004, p. 8). Between the ﬁrst
Summit of the Americas in 1994, which commenced the FTAA talks, and the
Miami meeting of 2003, when it became clear that an FTAA would not include an
IPR chapter, the United States signed bilateral agreements with Trinidad and
Tobago, Chile, the Central American countries and the Dominican Republic, in
addition to bilateral memoranda of understanding on IP with Paraguay and Peru.
In 2003, negotiations were underway with Panama, Peru, Colombia and Equador.
Overall, the United States systematically targeted at least one country in each of the
four customary unions of the Americas, namely the Andean Community, the
Caribbean Community, the Central American Market and Mercosur. The pre-
ambles of the FTAs with Chile, CAFTA-DR, Panama, Peru and Colombia referred
to a ‘‘resolve . . . to contribute to hemispheric integration and provide an impetus
toward establishing the Free Trade Area of the Americas’’. Hence, when Brazil
opposed the US stance on IP, the latter launched a regional offensive against Brazil,
which felt itself increasingly isolated. If one views the FTAA as a regional vehicle
towards achieving stronger IP protections at the multilateral level (OECD, 2003,
p. 112; Oliva, 2003), then the centrality of bilateral negotiations as a strategic tool
for the United States becomes apparent.

However, the US investment in building strategic alliances failed to produce the
sought-after results. The relationships fostered by the United States did not secure
an international consensus on US priorities. Indeed, the SPLT negotiations are
stagnating. Similarly, the FTAA negotiation did not culminate in an agreement,
with differences over IP norms a chief point of contention between Brazil and the
United States.

Not only were bilateral partnerships insufﬁcient to securing American regional
or multilateral ambitions, but some of their allies moved contrary to US interests.
Notably, several US partners supported Resolution WHA60.30 passed in May
2007. This resolution empowered the WHO to provide technical assistance to states
that wish to use trade law as a mechanism for improving access to medicines. These

r 183

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

partners moved forward in examining the relationship between IP and public health
even though American negotiators walked out twice during negotiations and
pressured their bilateral partners to divorce technical IP discussion from those
relating to health (Gerhardsen, 2007).

In the area of genetic resources, Peru, which is an FTA partner with the United
States, has been one of the most active members at the TRIPs Council and has
opposed the US position on several occasions.1 A good example of this opposition
is when Peru, supported by Colombia and Dominican Republic, two other FTA
signatories, co-sponsored a proposal that called for TRIPs to be amended so that
patent applicants would be required to disclose the origin of genetic resources or
associated traditional knowledge used in their inventions.2 The United States was in
total disagreement with the proposal.

Finally, at the WIPO Assembly, the Development Agenda,

initiated by
Argentina and Brazil, was actively supported by US bilateral partners, like the
Dominican Republic and Peru (May, 2007; WIPO, 2004). This Development
Agenda was adopted as a reaction to the WIPO Patent Agenda and demonstrated
a shift in WIPO priorities from a technical focus on the protection and governance
of IPRs to a shared United Nations (UN) focus on global developmental issues.
This paradigm shift indicates that the creation of a coalition of like-minded
countries is not sufﬁcient to impede the adoption of agendas that are not supported
by the United States.

The Emulation Effect

Former USTR Kantor believes that ‘‘many U.S. trading partners have recog-
nized—and this has been reﬂected in their trade negotiations with the United
States—. . . that strong intellectual property protections attract foreign investment
into their countries’’ (Kantor, 2005). The United States presents these success
stories as ‘‘models to follow’’, wherein social and economic beneﬁts are promoted to
subsequent negotiating partners to persuade them to adopt similar IP norms in
order to attract similar investment ﬂows and foster technological developments
(Schott, 2004, p. 372). While some precedent may be necessary during the initial
stage to convince sceptics and critics, it is hoped that, in a second wave, third
countries will voluntarily and unilaterally adopt similar norms, or, at a minimum,
be less resistant to US proposals.

The CAFTA negotiations exemplify the promotion of existing IP norms as a
template for growth. During these negotiations, Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) strategically advertised the model of Mexico,
a NAFTA member. PhRMA claimed that under NAFTA the ‘‘health of patients
across Mexico has improved dramatically’’ while countries ‘‘without strong in-
tellectual property regimes, like India, have very poor access to new medicines’’
(PhRMA, 2005). During the same negotiations, PhRMA also made allusions to
Jordan as a model: ‘‘New launches of pharmaceutical products more than doubled

184

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

in Jordan as a result of strong intellectual property laws it enacted after signing the
U.S.–Jordan Free Trade Agreement’’ (PhRMA, 2005).

The latter case is a key ‘‘success’’ story frequently cited by advocates of US
bilateralism. One of them is the International Intellectual Property Institute (IIPI),
a not-for-proﬁt organization funded jointly by the US government and private
corporations to increase awareness ‘‘on the use of intellectual property as a tool for
economic growth, particularly in developing countries’’. According to IIPI, due to
‘‘improved’’ IP norms ‘‘Jordanian companies have become attractive business
partners for international pharmaceutical companies as well as diversifying the
export markets’’. The USTR exempliﬁes Jordan and concludes that it ‘‘is an
example of how strong intellectual property protection can bring substantial
beneﬁts to developing countries’’ (USTR, 2004). According to the USTR, the
Jordanian model demonstrates that strong patent protection cannot only contribute
to economic growth, but it can also promote access to medicines. Since the FTA
was signed in 2000, the USTR highlights that ‘‘there have been 32 new innovative
product launches in Jordan, [and] a substantial increase in the rate of approval of
innovative drugs, helping [to] facilitate Jordanian consumers’ access to medicines’’
(USTR, 2004).

Similarly, Andres Mejia-Vergnaud and Ben Irvine (2008), from the Instituto
Desarrollo y Libertad and the International Policy Network, respectively, two pro-
free trade think tanks, used the example of Morocco to inﬂuence Thailand’s
policies. While Thailand was negotiating an FTA with the United States in
2004, they published an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal Asia concluding that ‘‘If
I were in Thailand, I would urge my government conﬁdently to follow the lead of
Morocco’’.

Empirical evidence, however, does not support this optimistic viewpoint. The
suspended FTA negotiation between the United States and Thailand is illustrative.
Although the suspension is largely due to the emergence of a political crisis in the
country, after 18 months of negotiations the two sides still disagreed on a number of
sensitive issues, including the protection of IPRs (CRS Report for Congress, 2006).
Discussions surrounding IPRs have attracted strong opposition from non-govern-
mental organizations, academics and bureaucrats who, after having closely studied
the consequences of FTAs involving the United States, called on the Thai govern-
ment to halt the negotiations. The WHO Country Representative in Thailand, Dr
William Aldis, warned about the negative effects on the Thai national AIDS
programme and its highly praised ‘‘30 baht’’ programme (Aldis, 2006). The World
Bank afﬁrmed that if Thailand would have signed an FTA with the United States,
then its compulsory licensing would be severely restricted—representing an addi-
tional cost of $3.2 billion for the Thai national health budget over 20 years
(Revenga et al., 2006). This strong resistance demonstrates the ability of opponents
to draw equally negative parallels from previous US FTA forays.

The negotiations between the United States and the Southern African Customs
Union are another example of a rejection of the US model. These negotiations,

r 185

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

underway since 2003, came to a standstill in 2004. South Africa’s chief negotiator
stated that the parties were unable to resolve differences in areas such as IP.
Informed especially by the Australian and the Moroccan experiences, he suggested
that the US demands ‘‘may not be appropriate for a developing county’’ (Mnyanda,
2004). This statement is particularly telling as it was a rejection of the USTR openly
framing the US–Jordan FTA as a tool to improve access to medicines (USTR, 2004).
These rejections of success stories are not the only examples indicating that the use
of bilateral agreements as models to follow is not working as planned. Indeed, most
academics describe the economic effects of bilateral agreements by using the language
of costs and risks rather than beneﬁts and opportunities. El-Said and El-Said (2005),
for example, argued that the beneﬁts to Jordan’s drug sector have been largely
overestimated and the costs underestimated (2005). Drahos et al. (2004) stated before
the Senate Select Committee on the US–Australia FTA that Australia’s Pharmaceu-
tical Beneﬁts Scheme (PBS) will have to pay at least one third more for its drugs under
the FTA than without it (2004). Krikorian et al. (2008) demonstrated that the new IP
rules adopted after the signing of the US–Morocco FTA are causing a threat to the
availability of cheap medicines for Moroccans. The voices of academics are supple-
mented by organizations that are similarly critical of the success stories promulgated.
OXFAM afﬁrmed that there have been no beneﬁts from introducing strict IP rules in
Jordan, despite positive assertions made by the USTR (2007). The Centre for
International Environmental Law—referring to positions taken by the WHO, the
UN and the International Law Associaton—highlighted the negative effects of IP
provisions in trade agreements. The intended success stories are thus reinterpreted and
widely communicated in scary stories.

The Interpretative Effect

Bilateral agreements can arguably be used as interpretative tools for existing
multilateral agreements. More speciﬁcally, it has been proposed that in future
disputes over provisions of TRIPs, the United States could present to the WTO
Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) bilateral agreements as evidence in support of its
desired interpretation. The Industry Functional Advisory Committee (IFAC), a
supporter of this view, stated in a report to the US government that FTAs ‘‘have
facilitated national implementation of the TRIPs obligations and have provided the
vehicle . . . for signiﬁcant clariﬁcations of TRIPs obligations in the FTA partners’’
(emphasis added, IFAC-3, 2004a; 2004b, p. 5)

The view that FTAs could be used to interpret TRIPs is not only expressed by
interested lobby groups but also by concerned academics. Several have noted that
the WTO agreements should not be interpreted in ‘‘clinical isolation from public
international law’’ (United States—Gasoline, 1996, p. 16) and consider harmoniza-
tion efforts in other fora positively (Trachtman, 2006). On the speciﬁc issue of IP,
Ruth Okediji expressed worries that the norms comprised in bilateral treaties will
form the context for interpreting treaties to which the United States is a signatory

186

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

(2001, pp. 602–4). Indeed, the Vienna Convention of the Law of Treaties 1969
provides, for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty, that the context
comprises ‘‘any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the
parties’’ and that ‘‘any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty’’ shall be
taken into account (article. 31). David Vaver (2003) offers an interesting example
when he argues that the higher the number of FTAs imposing the patentability of
business methods on states, the more inclined the WTO special groups will be to
consider business methods as an ‘‘invention’’ under TRIPs. Moreover, non-WTO
awards resulting from disputes over bilateral agreements ‘‘may prove useful as
guidance, even path breaking in legal theory or rationale, for WTO panels and the
Appellate Body’’ (Bhala, 2007, p. 84).

Two cases brought before the DSB provide some insight into the applicability
of this strategy. In the ﬁrst case (Canada—Term of Patent Protection, 2000), the
United States alleged that Canada was not complying with the TRIPs requirement
to grant a minimum term of protection from the ﬁlling date to all patents existing as
of the date of the application of TRIPs. In an effort to relax the interpretation of
this requirement, Canada argued that NAFTA recognizes as equivalent the terms of
protection of 20 years from the ﬁling date and of 17 years from the granting date.
The panel considered the argumentation presented on that point in referring to the
decision taken in United States—Restriction on Imports of Tuna (1994). In the latter
decision, the panel acknowledged the Vienna Convention’s general rule of inter-
pretation of international treaties, but ultimately concluded that the bilateral
agreements cited were not relevant to the interpretation of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Many were concluded before the negotiation of the
GATT and none could be taken as practice under the GATT. Thus, the panel in
Canada—Term of Patent Protection did not consider that the NAFTA provision
was a useful tool of interpretation to determine whether Canada complied with
TRIPs. This case demonstrates the unlikelihood that bilateral agreements will prove
useful as interpretive tools for multilateral agreements such as TRIPs. One must
note, however, that NAFTA was signed before TRIPs and that a future panel may
be inclined to take post-TRIPs bilateral agreements into consideration.

In the second case (Canada—Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products,
2000), the EU sought a ruling on a Canadian exception that allowing manufacturers
of generic drugs to use the patented invention to obtain marketing approval, similar
to the US Bolar exception, violated TRIPs. The panel held that the legal situation in
various countries—including the United States—could not serve as a tool in the
interpretation, despite the Vienna Convention’s article 31 regarding ‘‘subsequent
practice’’. Article 3(2) of the Dispute Settlement Understanding provides that
panels cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations of members. According
to the panel, this provision indicates that WTO members wanted to retain strict
control over the modiﬁcation of the rules that they had agreed to and did not wish
the meaning of rules to be changed in any other way (p. 61). Additionally, the panel
noted that the requirements for establishing ‘‘subsequent practice’’ would be difﬁcult

r 187

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

to satisfy in practice due to the fact that, according to the wording of the general rule,
a ‘‘subsequent practice’’ must establish a tacit agreement between all parties (p. 61).
Moreover, even if states come to an agreement on the interpretation of an
unclear provision in a multilateral treaty during the dispute-settlement process, that
interpretation has limited application. Agreements made between states when a
multilateral provision is unclear only apply to the dispute in question and between
the states directly involved (Rhodes, 2000, pp. 555–6).

The situation might be different if a large proportion of WTO members had
agreed to a speciﬁc provision in bilateral agreements and enforced it domestically.
Peter Yu considers that the provisions contained in bilateral agreements could
eventually create new customary international norms (2004, p. 397). This could
occur only if a sufﬁcient number of countries expressly and consistently recognize
these provisions as legal norms governing their state’s conduct. In a bilateral
dispute-settlement process, the United States would then be in a position to ask a
third country to comply with these new norms of international customary law.

However, before this can happen, several conditions must be met. Indeed, the
behaviour of states may only be considered customary law when it fulﬁls two chief
conditions: it must reﬂect the general practice of states, and states must believe that
there is a legal obligation to conduct themselves in such a manner (Kindred and
Saunders, 2006, p. 148). Presently, the more stringent IP norms imposed through
FTAs do not meet these two criteria. The ﬁrst condition is not fulﬁlled as those
norms are not sufﬁciently ‘‘numerous, general, constant, and uniform’’ in their
application. When one considers the massive rejection of the more stringent IP
norms by several countries, in addition to the harsh criticisms of TRIPs-Plus
agreements expressed by some delegations at WIPO and at WHO, one can conclude
that there is no belief that there is a legal obligation to respect those norms. Several
countries that enhanced their patent protection did so to respond to economical and
political pressure, not to comply with an emerging customary norm. Therefore, US
bilateral agreements are unlikely to serve as the basis for new interpretations of
existing multilateral agreements or new customary international norms.

The Adherence Effect

Little success, if any, can be attributed to the use of bilateral agreements as strategic
tools to create chain links, coalitions of the like-minded, models to follow, new
interpretation of multilateral treaties or customary international law. They can,
however, reinforce their IP-related multilateral cousins by requiring signatories to
become party. Indeed, a number of the US FTAs require signatories to adhere to
multilateral treaties that are not mentioned in TRIPs. In this manner, the United
States is harmonizing the trade environment to favour a smooth transition towards
stronger IP protections at the multilateral level.

There are four multilateral agreements that the United States has seemingly
identiﬁed as important to the global IP architecture. The ﬁrst is the Budapest Treaty

188

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

on the International Recognition of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the
Purposes of Patent Procedure. The US agreement with Jordan requires that: ‘‘when
it is not possible to provide a sufﬁcient written description of the invention . . . each
Party shall require a deposit with an ‘‘international depository authority,’’ as
deﬁned in the Budapest Treaty’’ (article 4.21). While this wording does not require
that Jordan comply with the Treaty of Budapest, this subsequently became required
in all US FTAs. Indeed, in the US bilateral treaties signed with Morocco, Australia,
Bahrain, countries of Central America and Dominican Republic, Colombia, Oman,
Panama, Republic of Korea and Peru, each contain the wording: ‘‘[e]ach party shall
ratify or accede to . . .’’ (US–Morocco FTA, article 15.1.2; US–Australia FTA,
article 17.1.2; US–Bahrain FTA, article 14.1.2; CAFTA–DR–US, article 15.1.3;
US–Colombia FTA, article 16.1.2; US–Oman FTA, article 15.1.2; US–Panama
TPA, article 15.1.2; Korea–US FTA, article 18.1.3 and US–Peru TPA, article
16.1.2.) While some of these countries have yet to ratify, including Morocco,
Bahrain and Costa Rica, a number of CAFTA countries, including the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, ratiﬁed the treaty
following their FTA with the United States.

Second, several FTAs refer to the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), even
though such a requirement is not found in TRIPs or bilateral treaties concluded
before 2003. The US–Jordan agreement, concluded in 2000, was the ﬁrst US FTA
that referred to the PCT. The agreement states that parties will ‘‘make best efforts to
ratify or accede to the Patent Cooperation Treaty (1984)’’ (article 4.2). Although the
wording does not require PCT membership, later bilateral treaties have (US–Aus-
tralia FTA, article 17.1.2; US–Singapore FTA, article 16.1.2; US–Morocco FTA,
article 15.1.2; CAFTA–DR–US, article 15.1.3; US–Chili FTA, article 17.1.2;
US–Bahrain FTA, article 14.1.2). In certain situation this requirement was not
onerous as the partner was already party to the PCT. However, in the case of at
least seven FTAs, this provision requires the further compliance of the US partner.
The United States has increasingly required undertakings from partners to the
Patent Law Treaty (PLT). The ﬁrst reference to the PLT was in the US–Chile FTA
in 2003. It provides that ‘‘[e]ach Party shall undertake reasonable efforts to ratify or
accede to the [PLT] in a manner consistent with its domestic law’’ (article 17.1.4). A
few months later, the CAFTA–DR treaty used almost identical wording (article
15.1.6). The wording of the subsequent FTAs with Australia, Morocco and Bahrain
used progressively stronger language. None of the bilateral treaties, however,
require ratiﬁcation of the PLT. This may be explained by the fact that the United
States itself has still not ratiﬁed the PLT. Nonetheless, by referring to the PLT in its
recent bilateral treaties, it has supported the diffusion, the momentum and coming
into force of this treaty.

Fourth, of the developing countries that recently joined UPOV, many did so
after concluding a bilateral treaty with the United States (Table 2). This suggests
that several countries may have joined UPOV to honour bilateral commitments. A
number of other factors likely contributed to their accession to UPOV, including

r 189

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Table 2: Correlation Between Developing Country Becoming Party to a Bilateral Treaty with

the US Referring to or Requiring UPOV Membership

UPOV
Members

Equador

Jordan
Latvia

Lithuania

Morocco
Mexico
Nicaragua

Singapore
Dominican
Republic

Bilateral treaty that refers to
the UPOV

Date of Signature of
Treaty with US

Date of UPOV
accession

IP Agreement with the US
(article 6)
FTA with the US (article 4.1)
Commercial Agreement with the
US (article 6)
Commercial agreement with the
US (article 6)
FTA with the US (article 6)
NAFTA (article 1701)
IP Agreement with the US
(article 1)
FTA with the US (16.1.2)
FTA with the US (CAFTA–DR)
(15.1.5)

1993

8 August 1997

24 October 2000
6 July 1994

24 October 2004
30 August 2002

26 April 1994

10 December 2003

2 March 2004
17 December 1992
7 January 1998

8 October 2006
9 August 1997
6 September 2001

6 May 2003
5 August 2004

30 July 2004
16 June 2007

Source: Original to this article

the TRIPs provision to protect plant varieties (article 27(3)(b)), the growth in
exports of cut ﬂowers and horticultural plants coming from certain developing
countries, negotiations for WTO membership, the return of the UPOV Convention
to the international agenda during its review in 1991 and the extended deadline in
1998 to join the previous version of the convention. FTAs are therefore not the only
driving force behind the growing number of countries joining the UPOV. However,
several countries with a large number of small farmers did not necessarily want to
develop their seed industries in a manner that was UPOV compliant, and would
have preferred to develop their own sui generis systems.

Concluding Remarks

Through the use of bilateral agreements, the United States has sought to create a
more stringent patent protection system than that stipulated in TRIPs. USTR
Schwab epitomizes the overall objective of bilateral negotiations that ‘‘develop a
precedent that could at some point be translated in a multilateral setting’’
(Rayasam, 2006, p. 22). This reality has, as a consequence, generated a great deal
of negative commentary. The main thrust of this backlash is concerned that the US
government is using bilateral agreements as vehicles in perpetuating its hegemony
over the international patent regime.

This article examined the current wave of bilateral agreements through the lens
of six mechanisms that could give rise to a strategic advantage for the United States.
We conclude that, for the most part, the above claim must be nuanced. To date, US

190

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

efforts to use bilateral agreements as tools for reforming the international IP regime
beyond the speciﬁc targeted countries seem to have failed. Only in its objective of
promoting the accession to existing multilateral agreements has the United States
demonstrated tangible results.

Moreover, the legitimacy of imposing TRIPs-Plus obligations on bilateral
partners is being challenged within the US government. In the US Congress, it
has been argued that IP provisions of FTAs ‘‘violate the requirement in section 2101
(b)(4)(C) of the Trade Promotion Authority Act 2002 to uphold the 2001 WTO
Declaration on Public Health’’ (Congress of the United States, 2004). This led in
2007 to a compromise understanding entitled the Bipartisan Agreement on Trade
Policy, also known as the New Trade Policy Template. It calls for enhanced
provisions in all future US bilateral and regional free trade agreements on IP
protection, striking a balance between the rights of drug companies to protect their
patents and the need of developing countries for life-saving drugs.

As a result, the recent US FTAs with Colombia, Peru and Panama do not go as far
beyond TRIPs as the 2003–5 FTAs. Several patent-related rules were relaxed in the
latest agreements,
including rules on data exclusivity, patent linkage and patent
extension. A reference to the Doha Declaration and the ability of each country to
protect public health was added in the body of these agreements instead of as an
appended letter. In addition, side letters on biodiversity were signed, recognizing the
importance of ‘‘respecting and preserving traditional knowledge and practices of
indigenous and other communities’’. According to Pedro Roffe and David Vivas-Eugui,
‘‘the criticisms related to some aspects of the agreements, particularly those concerning
the reduction of TRIPs ﬂexibilities have produced concrete results’’ (2007, p. 16).

On the whole, bilateral agreements have been successful

in strengthening
domestic IP protection under relatively limited circumstances. None of these cases
involve major trading partners or major counterfeiters. Further, they have con-
tributed to the anti-development reputation of the US government in a time when it
is seeking support to conclude the Doha Round at the WTO. Instead of leveraging
multilateral negotiations, bilateral agreements have created instability and frag-
mentation, among WTO members and within the US Congress, which could
ultimately damage the bargaining position of the USTR.

Given these failures, it may be prudent for Congress and the American public to
assess whether resources that are being dedicated to bilateral negotiations could be
better allocated. For example, those same resources may be more efﬁciently spent
on building multilateral relations, negotiating with European countries or providing
enforcement support in countries known as major sources of counterfeit goods
(Schott, 2004, p. 377). US failures also suggest that the EU, Switzerland, Japan and
other states would not beneﬁt from imitating the US model for negotiating FTAs in
the area of IP.

There also exists an open question as to why this strategy failed. Although
developing countries might not have interest in unilaterally implementing TRIPs-
Plus provisions, they certainly have an interest, once they have signed an FTA with

r 191

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

United States, in seeing competitors adopting similar constrains. One explanation is
that US partners lack the necessary incentive, i.e. a strong internal market, to
duplicate the US strategy of using trade to promote strong IP standards. An
alternative explanation is that the impact of the US bilateral strategy will only be
noticeable in the following years. One decade of active bilateralism might not be
enough to appreciate fully its dynamic effects on regional and multilateral negotia-
tions. The multilateralization of Cordell Hull’s vision of international trade law, for
example, was only noticeable with the GATT of 1947, 13 years after the Reciprocal
Trade Agreements Act 1934, after a period of intense bilateralism (Haggard, 1988).
Recent developments with the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA)
project indicate that it could soon become the ﬁrst tangible success of the US
bilateral strategy. Although little is known about the substance of the ACTA
project, many suspect that it will be a free-standing plurilateral agreement that will
include more stringent patent protection norms than those stipulated under TRIPs
(Sell, 2008). Interestingly, nearly half of the parties that participated at the last
ACTA negotiation held in Washington on 30–31 July 2008 were FTA partners with
the United States. One wonders whether Jordan, Korea, Mexico, Morocco,
Singapore and the United Arab Emirates would have actively participated in the
ACTA process if they had not signed an FTA with the United States or were not in
the process of negotiating such a bilateral agreement. If an extensive ACTA is made
possible by the relations developed through bilateral agreements, it will constitute
the ﬁrst success for the US bilateral strategy. So far, bilateralism has brought more
drawbacks than beneﬁts to the US inﬂuence over international patent law.

About the Author

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin, Political Science Department, Universit ´e libre de Bruxelles, 39
FD Roosevelt, CP 172, Brussels, Belgium. He is a professor at the Universit ´e Libre
de Bruxelles where he teaches foreign policy analysis and international political
economy. He has an interdisciplinary background in international relations,
including a dual Ph.D. in political science and law. Prior to joining TIP, he was a
project leader at the Centre for Intellectual Property Policy at McGill University
and taught intellectual property law, international trade law and environmental
politics at three other universities. In the last three years, Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric has
published one book and ten peer-reviewed articles on various topics, including
international patent law making, biodiversity governance and international invest-
ment policy; e-mail: jmorin@ulb.ac.be

Notes

The author would like to thank Joanie Lapalme, Rhonda Grintuch and Caroline Twiss for
their research assistance and the Centre for Intellectual Property Policy (www.cipp/mcgill.ca)
and TIP (www.theinnovationpartnership.org) for their support.

192

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

1 For examples, see IP/C/W/484, IP/C/W/474, IP/C/W/458, IP/C/W/447, IP/C/W/441/

Rev.1 and IP/C/W/442.

2 See IP/C/W/474 and IP/C/W/429/Rev.1/Add.3.

References

Abbott, F. (2006) Intellectual Property Provisions of Bilateral and Regional Trade Agreements

in Light of US Federal Law. International Centre for Trade and Sustainable
Development-United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Geneva.

Aldis, W. L. (2006) ‘It Could Be a Matter of Life and Death’, The Bangkok Post [online].

Available at hhttp://www.aegis.org/news/bp/2006/BP060102.htmli [Accessed April
2008].

Baldwin, R. (1997) ‘The Causes of Regionalism’, The World Economy, 20(7), 865–88.
Bhala, R. (2007) ‘Competitive Liberalization, Competitive Imperialism, and Intellectual

Property’, Liverpool Law Review, 28(1), 77–105.

Canada—Patent Protection of Pharmaceutical Products (2000), WTO Doc (Panel Report)

WT/DS114/R.

Canada—Term of Patent Protection (2000), WTO Doc (Appellate Body) WT/DS170/R.
Caporaso, J. A. (1992) ‘International Relations Theory and Multilateralism: The Search for

Foundations’, International Organization, 46(3), 599–632.

Congress of the United States (2004) Letter from 12 Members of Congress to President Bush

on Intellectual Property Provisions in CAFTA [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.cptech.org/ip/health/trade/cafta/congress09302004.htmli [Accessed April 2008].

Congressional Research Service Report for Congress (2006) U.S.–Thailand Free Trade

Agreement Negotiations [online]. The Library of Congress. Available at hhttp://
www.nationalaglawcenter.org/assets/crs/RL32314.pdfi [Accessed April 2008].

Drahos, P. (2003) Expanding Intellectual Property’s Empire: The Role of FTAs [online]. Available

at hhttp://www.grain.org/rights/TRIPsplus.cfm?id=28i [Accessed January 2008].

Drahos, P., Faunce, T., Goddard, M. and Henry, D. (2004) The FTA and the PBS—A

Submission to the Senate Select Committee on the US–Australia Free Trade Agreement
[online]. Available at hhttp://www.aftinet.org.au/campaigns/US_FTA/
henrydrahossenatesub2.pdfi [Accessed March 2008].

El-Said, H. and El-Said, M. (2005) ‘TRIPs, Bilateralism, Multilateralism and Implications
for Developing Countries: Jordan’s Drug Sector’, Manchester Journal of International
Economic Law, 2(1), 59–731.

El Said, M. K. (2007) ‘The European TRIPs-Plus Model and the Arab World: From Co-

operation to Association—a New Era in the Global IPRs Regime?’, Liverpool Law
Review, 28(1), 143–74.

Fink, C. and Reichenmiller, P. (2005) Tightening TRIPs: The Intellectual Property Provisions

of Recent US Free Trade Agreements. The World Bank, Washington, DC.

Gerhardsen, T. S. (2006) ‘US Advises Developing Country FTA Partners Not To Follow
WHO IP Plan, Intellectual Property Watch [online], 11 December. Available at hhttp://
www.ip-watch.org/weblog/index.php?p=485&res=1280_ffi [Accessed August 2007].

Gerhardsen, T. S. (2007) ‘World Health Assembly Agrees on IP and Innovation; US

Abstains’, Intellectual Property Watch [online]. Available at hhttp://www.ip-watch.org/
weblog/index.php?p=630&res=1280i [Accessed August 2007].

r 193

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Gervais, D. J. (2002) ‘The Internationalization of Intellectual Property: New Challenges from

the Very Old and the Very New’, Fordham Intellectual Property, Media and
Entertainment Law Journal, 12, 929–90.

GRAIN (2001) ‘TRIPs-Plus’ Through the Back Door [online]. GRAIN publications.

Available at hwww.grain.org/publications/TRIPs-plus-en.cfmi [Accessed September
2008].

Greenaway, D. and Milner, C. (2001) ‘Multilateral Trade Reform, Regionalism and

Developing Countries’, in S. Lahiri (ed.), Regionalism and Globalization: Theory and
Practice. Routledge, New York, pp. 144–69.

Guzman, A. T. (1998) ‘Why LDCs Sign Treaties that Hurt Them: Explaining the

Popularity of Bilateral Investment Treaties’, Virginia Journal of International Law, 15,
639–88.

Haggard, S. (1988) ‘The Institutional Foundations of Hegemony: Explaining the Reciprocal

Trade Agreements Act of 1934’, International Organization, 42(1), 91–119.

Hufbauer, G. C. and Kotschwar, B. (1998) The Future of Regional Trading Arrangements in

the Western Hemisphere [online]. Washington Institute for International Economics.
Available at hhhttp://www.iie.com/publications/papers/print.cfm?doc=pub&
ResearchID=318i [Accessed August 2007].

Ikenberry, J. G. and Kupchan, C. A. (1990) ‘Socialization and Hegemonic Power’,

International Organization, 40(3), 283–315.

Industry Functional Advisory Committee on Intellectual Property Rights for Trade Policy

Matters (IFAC-3) (2004a) The U.S.–Australia Free Trade Agreement (FTA) The
Intellectual Provision [online]. Available at hhttp://www.ustr.gov/assets/
Trade_Agreements/Bilateral/Australia_FTA/Reports/asset_upload_ﬁle813_3398.pdfi
[Accessed April 2008].

Industry Functional Advisory Committee on Intellectual Property Rights for Trade Policy

Matters (IFAC-3) (2004b) The U.S.–Morocco Free Trade Agreement (FTA) The
Intellectual Provision [online]. Available at hhttp://www.grain.org/rights_ﬁles/
ifac03%20on%20US-Morocco%20FTA.pdfi [Accessed April 2008].

International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (2008), Membership

[online]. International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants. Available at
hhttp://www.upov.int/i [Accessed September].

Kantor, M. (2005) US Free Trade Agreements and the Public Health [online]. World Health

Organization—CIPIH Submissions, Available at hhttp://www.who.int/intellectual
property/submissions/US%20FTAs%20and%20the%20Public%20Health.pdfi
[Accessed September 2008].

Kindred, H. and Saunders, P. (2006) International Law: Chieﬂy as Interpreted and Applied in

Canada. Edmond Montgomery Publications, Toronto.

Krikorian, G., Marhoum, K., Filali, E. and Himmich, H. (2008) ‘L’acce` s aux m ´edicaments

sous le nouveau r ´egime de protection des brevets: cas du sida au Maroc’, Knowledge
Ecology Studies, 2, 1–20.

Krikorian, G. P. and Szymkowiak, D. (2007) ‘Intellectual Property Rights in the Making:
The Evolution of Intellectual Property Provisions in US Free Trade Agreements and
Access to Medicine’, The , 10(5), 388–418.

Kuanpoth, J. (2006) ‘TRIPs-Plus Intellectual Property Rules: Impact on Thailand’s Public

Health’, The , 9(5), 573–91.

194

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Larson, A. (2002) Reports Growing Appreciation for IPR Laws Overseas (File EPF 211)

[online]. Department of State. Available at hhttp://usinfo.org/wf-archive/2002/020212/
epf211.htmi [Accessed September 2008].

Lawrence, R. (1996) Regionalism, Multilateralism and Deeper Integration. Brookings

Institute, Washington.

Mayne, R. (2004) Regionalism, Bilateralism, and TRIP Plus Agreements: The Threat to

Developing Countries. PNUD, New York.

Mejia-Vergnaud, A. and Irvine, B. (2008) ‘Are Free-Trade Agreements Good for Your
Health?’, The Wall Street Journal Asia [online]. Available at hhttp://online.wsj.com/
article/SB109477031000214138.htmli [Accessed March 2008].

Mnyanda, L. (2004) ‘US-SACU Trade Talks Grind to a Halt’, Business Day [online].

Available at: hhttp://www.bilaterals.org/article.php3?id_article=799i [Accessed March
2008].

Okediji, R. (2001) ‘TRIPs Dispute Settlement and the Sources of (International) Copyright

Law’, Journal of the Copyright Society of the U.S.A., 49(2), 585–648.

Okediji, R. (2004) ‘Back to Bilateralism? Pendulum Swings in International Intellectual

Property Protection’, University of Ottawa Law and Technology Journal, 125,
125–47.

Oliva, M. J. (2003) Intellectual Property in the FTAA: Little Opportunity and Much Risk

[online]. The Centre for International Environmental Law (CIEL). Available at: hhttp://
www.ciel.org/Publications/pubtae.htmli [Accessed August 2007].

Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (2005) Developing Countries Gain
More Access To Medicines Under CAFTA [online]. The Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America—Press Releases. Available at hhttp://www.phrma.org/
news_room/press_releases/developing_countries_gain_access_to_more_medicines_
under_cafta/i [Accessed March 2008].

Price, D. (2004) ‘The US–Bahrain Free Trade Agreement and Intellectual Property

Protection’, , 7(6), 829–50.

Rayasam, R. (2006) ‘Free-Trade Evangelist’, US News World Report, 6 August.
Rein, J. (2001) ‘International Governance Through Trade Agreement: Patent Protection for

Essential Medicines’, Journal of International Law and Business, 21, 379–408.

Revenga, A., Over, M., Masaki, E., Peerapatanapokin, W., Gold, J., Tangcharoensathien, V.
and Thanprasertsuk, S. (2006) The Economics of Effective AIDS Treatment: Evaluating
Policy Options for Thailand. The World Bank, Washington, DC.

Rhodes, S. A. (2000) ‘The Article 21.5/22 Problem: Clariﬁcation Through Bilateral

Agreements?’, Journal of International Economic Law, 3(3), 553–8.

Roffe, P. (2004) Bilateral Agreements and a TRIPs-Plus World: The Chile–USA Free Trade
Agreement [online]. Quaker International Affairs Program, Ottawa. Available at hhttp://
geneva.quno.info/pdf/Chile(US)ﬁnal.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

Roffe, P. and Spennemann, C. (2006) ‘The Impact of FTAs on Public Health Policies and
TRIPs Flexibilities’, International Journal of Intellectual Property Management, 1(1/2),
75–93.

Roffe, P. and Vivas-Eugui, D. (2007) ‘A Shift in Intellectual Property Policy in US FTAs?’,

Bridges, 11(5), 15–6.

Rossi, F. (2006) ‘Free Trade Agreements and TRIPs-Plus Measures’, International Journal of

Intellectual Property Management, 1(1/2), 150–72.

r 195

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Schott, J. (2004) ‘Assessing US FTA Policy’, in J. Schott (ed.), Free Trade Agreements: US

Strategies and Priorities. Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, pp.
359–81.

Sell, S. (2008) The Global IP Upward Ratchet, Anti-Counterfeiting and Piracy Enforcement

Efforts: The State of Play. Institute for Global and International Studies, George
Washington University, Washington, DC.

Sell, S. K. (2003) Private Power, Public Law: The Globalization of Intellectual Property Rights.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Trachtman, J. (2006) ‘The World Trading System, the International Legal System and

Multilevel Choice’, European Law Journal, 22(4), 469–85.

US Government Accountability Ofﬁce (2004) International Trade: Intensifying Free Trade

Negotiating Agenda Calls for Better Allocation of Staff and Resources, US Government
Document GAO-04-223.

US Government Accountability Ofﬁce (2007) International Trade—An Analysis of Free Trade
Agreements and Congressional and Private Sector Consultations under Trade Promotion
Authority [online]. US Government Accountability Ofﬁce. Available at hhttp://
www.gao.gov/new.items/d0859.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].

United States—Restriction on Imports of Tuna (1994), GATT Doc. DS29/R.
United States—Standards for Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline (1996), WTO Doc. WT/

DS2/AB/R.

US Trade Representatives (2003) U.S. and Southern African Nations Plan for Upcoming FTA

Negotiations [online]. Available at hhttp://www.ustr.gov/Document_Library/Press
_Releases/2003/January/US_Southern_African_Nations_Plan_for_Upcoming_FTA_
Negotiations.htmli [Accessed March 2008].

US Trade Representatives (2004) U.S.–Bahrain FTA: Fact Sheet on Access to Medicines
[online]. Available at hhttp://www.ustr.gov/Document_Library/Fact_Sheets/2004/
USBahrain_FTA_Fact_Sheet_on_Access_to_Medicines.htmli [Accessed March 2008].

US Trade Representatives (2007) 2007 Special 301 Report [online]. Available at hhttp://

www.ustr.gov/assets/Document_Library/Reports_Publications/2007/
2007_Special_301_Review/asset_upload_ﬁle230_11122.pdfi [Accessed September 2008].
Vaver, D. (2003) ‘Le concept d’invention en droit des brevets: Bilan et perspectives’, in M.

Vivant (ed.), Prot ´eger les inventions de demain, biotechnologies, logiciels et m ´ethodes
d’affaires. La Documentation Franc¸ aise, Paris, pp. 271–330.

Vivas-Eugui, D. (2003) Regional and Bilateral Agreements and a TRIPs-Plus World: The Free

Trade Area of the the Americas (FTAA). Quaker United Nations Ofﬁce, Geneva.

World Intellectual Property Organization (2004) Information on Certain Recent Developments
in Relation to the Draft Substantive Patent Law Treaty (SPLT), Standing Committee on
the Law of Patents (10th Session), SCP/10/8, Geneva.

Yarbrough, B. V. and Yarbrough, R. M. (1987) ‘Cooperation in the Liberalization of

International Trade: After Hegemony, What?’, International Organization, 41(1), 1–26.

Yu, P. (2003) ‘US Ofﬁcial see FTA with Morocco as Potential Link to Tunisia, Algeria’,

Inside US Trade, 1.

Yu, P. (2004) ‘Currents and Crosscurrents in the International Intellectual Property Regime’,

Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review, 38, 323–444.

196

r Multilateralizing TRIPs-Plus Agreements

Jean-Fr ´ed ´eric Morin

US Bilateral Treaties Including Substantive Patent Norms Signed Since
1994

Agreement Between the Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the Republic of Nicaragua Concerning Protection of Intellec-
tual Property Rights (7 January 1998).

Agreement Between the United States of America and the Hashemite Kingdom of

Jordan on the Establishment of a Free Trade Area (24 October 2000).

Agreement Between the United States of America and the Kingdom of Cambodia
on Trade Relations and Intellectual Property Rights Protection (4 October
1996).

Agreement Between the United States of America and the Laos People Democratic

Republic on Trade Relations (unknown date, 1997).

Agreement Between the United States of America and the Republic of Latvia on

the Relation and Intellectual Property Rights Protection (6 July 1994).

Agreement Between the United States of America and the Republic of Lithuania on

Trade Relations and Intellectual Property Rights Protection (26 April 1994).

Agreement Between the United States of America and the Socialist Republic of

Vietnam on Trade Relations (13 July 2000).

Agreement Concerning the Protection and Enforcement of Intellectual Property
Rights Between the Government of the United States of America and the
Government of Jamaica (17 March 1994).

Central America–Dominican Republic–United States Free Trade Agreement (17

December 2003) (CAFTA–DR–US FTA).

Korea–US Free Trade Agreement (20 June 2007) (Korea–US FTA).
Memorandum of Understanding Between the Government of the United States of
America and the Government of Trinidad and Tobago Concerning Protection
of Intellectual Property Rights (26 September 1994).

US–Australia Free Trade Agreement (18 May 2004) (US–Australia FTA).
US–Bahrain Free Trade Agreement (14 September 2004) (US–Bahrain FTA).
US–Chile Free Trade Agreement (6 June 2003) (US–Chile FTA).
US–Colombia Free Trade Agreement (22 November 2006) (US–Colombia FTA).
US–Morocco Free Trade Agreement (2 March 2004) (US–Morocco FTA).
US–Oman Free Trade Agreement (19 January 2006) (US–Oman FTA).
US–Panama Trade Promotion Agreement (28 June 2008) (US–Panama TPA).
US–Peru Trade Promotion Agreement (4 December 2006) (US–Peru TPA).
US–Singapore Free Trade Agreement (6 May 2003) (US–Singapore FTA).

r 197


