Non-Obviousness 

Mario FRANZOSI* 

INTRODUCTION 

Notwithstandmg  its  success,  the  system  created  by 

the  European  Patent 
Convention (EPc) is still confronted with a series of unresolved issues that do not allow 
it  to  become  entirely  rational.  For  instance,  it is not  clear yet  in all Member States 
whether  a  granted  European  patent  has  to  be  considered  a  truly  European  title, 
governed by the European law as far as vahdity and scope of protection  are concerned, 
or a national patent instead. Perhaps an indication of the uncertainty is not so much the 
fact that some courts have taken the first approach1 and others the second,2 but the fact 
that some courts have taken one approach to then shifi to the opposite.3 

A major d~fficulty resides in the fact that there is not a clear understanding of the 
yardstick to measure inventive level (also called non-obviousness,  or inventive step, or 
inventiveness) .4  The European  Patent  Office  (EPo) constantly  applies  the  principle 
outlined in AECI, in Decision5 T 1/81, that: 

“ ... patents  granted  under the EPC should have  inventive step sufficient to ensure  to  the 
patentees a fair degree of certainty that, if contested, the validity of the patent will be upheld 
by  a national court. The standard should anyhow not be below what may be considered an 
average amongst the standards presently applied by the Contracting States.” 
National courts seem to hold sometimes that the standard of the EPO is too low.6 
This  difficulty  cannot  be  resolved  in  an  institutionally  recognizable  manner,  since  a 
European court having jurisdiction in this matter does not exist.7 It is only the constant 

* Attorney,  Franzod,  Dal  Negro  and  Partners,  Milan-Rome,  Italy.  Was formerly with  the  University  of 
The author may be contacted at: nf?anzosi@franzosi.com*. 

Parma, Italy; and now Visiting Lecturer at the University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A. 

Rechtschutz und Urheberrecht Teil (GRuR), 1989, 496; IIC, 1990, 372. 

1  See  Fasern-Herstellungsueelfahren  (Fibre  production  process),  3  Ni  40/87,  2  November  1988, Gewerblicher 
2  To  some  extent,  Tool  Holder  Spindles,  Zurich  Commercial Court,  3  December  1991,  1992  GRUR 
’ Omanon/Chiron, Court ofAppeal ofThe Harme, 1 December 1994; and Boston/Cordis. 23 April 1999, Court 

intemationaler Teil (GRUR Int.), 783. 
of Appeaof The Hague, IER,  1998 170. 

4  In the Italian terminology, s t i l l  called sometimes creativity or originality or intrinsic novelty. 
5  T 1/81, AEcr/Themoplastic Sockets, O.J. 1981, 439. 
6 See J. Brinkhof, The Revocation ofEuropean Patents, IIC 225, 1996; J. Pagenberg, Dgerent Level oflnventiue Step 
for  German and European Patents? The Present Practice OfNullity Proceedings in  Germany, 6 Irc 763, 1991. 
7  Only recently a draft of a regulation for a European Court and for a Protocol connected to the European 
Patent Convention has been prepared and discussed. See European Patent Litigation Protocol (EPLP), available at: 
and Commission of the European 
cchttp://www.european-patent-office.org/news/pressre1/2~0~08~03~e.h~~~; 
Community, Commission  Working Document on the Planned Community Patentjurisdiction, Brussels, 30 August 2002. 

- 

234 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

adoption and acceptance of the yardstick by  the EPO and the national courts8 that can 
make it controlling.9 

For  the  determination  of  non-obviousness,  the  EPO applies  what  it  calls  the 
objective  criterion  based  on  the  problem-and-solution  approach.  As  outlined  by 
Paterson,”-’ it consists of the following steps: 

(a)  With reference to the claimed invention to be assessed, the “closest prior art” 
is  determined  (for  example,  the  prior  document  that  comes  closest  to 
disclosing the invention). 

(b)  Starting from this closest prior art and the technical results or effect achieved 
thereby, and by comparison with the technical effect achieved by the claimed 
invention, the objective technical problem to be  solved in progressing from 
the closest prior art to the claimed invention is determined. 
The obviousness, or otherwise, of the proposed solution to this problem to a 
person skilled in the art, starting from the closest prior art, is assessed.’’ 

(c) 

This article discusses the so-called  “objective criterion” adopted by the EPO. Even 
if the criterion is not totally objective, it leads to less uncertain results than other criteria; 
but there is, perhaps, also room for improvement. A more detailed criterion is suggested 
herein, but for the examination of an application and for the evaluation of the inventive 
level of a granted patent. 

I.  THE CONCEPT OF INVENTION 

The very concept of invention shows that an objective criterion (to establish in a 
single case  whether  there  is  a  patentable invention)  does not  and  cannot exist. If an 
objective criteria were adopted, it would not make a distinction on the basis of whether 
or not there was inventiveness but on other elements. Those elements may be akin to 
the concept of invention, but cannot coincide. 

8  See Biogen v. Medeua,  1997, R.P.C.  1, where the House of Lords took pains to stress that they considered 

decisions of the Technical Board highly authoritative. 

9  From a practical point of view, some help  may be  obtained  Gom  the  exchange of views of judges;  see 

U. Krieger, When  Will the European Community Patent Finally Am’ve? 29 IIC 860, 1998. 
lo  G. Paterson, The European Patent System, Sweet and Maxwell, London, 1992, p.  424. The EPO publication 
called Care-Law ofthe Board  ofAppeal ofthe European Patent  Office, 3rd edition, 1998, p. 110, mentions four steps, 
namely:  (a) identify the  “closest  prior  art”; (b) assess  the  technical results  (or effects)  achieved by  the  claimed 
invention when compared with the “closest prior art”; (c) define the technical problem to be solved as the object 
of the invention to achieve these results; and  (d) examining whether or not a skilled person, having regard to the 
state of the art in the sense of Article 54(2), would have suggested the claimed technical feature for obtaining the 
results achieved by the claimed invention. See also EPO Guidelines, c-IV, 9.5. 

Different was the c o m e  of action followed by the English Courts, as outlined in Wzndsurfrng International v. 
Tabur Marine,  1985 R.P.C.  59, at  7 3  f., and reformulated in Molynlycke v.  Procter  and  Gamble, 1994 R.P.C.  49: 
(i) What is  the inventive step said to be involved in the patent in suit? (ii) What was, at the priority date, the state 
of the art (as statutory-defined) relevant to that step? (iii) In what respect does the step go beyond,  or differ &om, 
the state of the art? (iv) Having regard to such development or difference, would the step be obvious to the skilled 
man? 

NON-OBVIOUSNESS 

235 

Invention is the combining of separate ideas, whose connecting principle did not 

exist before.12 

Nothing can be created anew (only Zeus could generate Athena, already perfect, 
from his  brain).  Human  hands  have  to work  on existing things, and human  minds 
have  to  work  on  existing  ideas.  Existing  things  and  existing  ideas  are  modified 
(through  association  or  combination:  the  words  can  be  used  here  in  any 
combination),  to  create  new  things  or  new  ideas.  Every  inventor,  every  man  or 
woman  in his  or her day-to-day  operation,  has  to build on top  of the patrimony  of 
existing ideas and existing materials. 

There are two procedures for combining existing ideas. The first, when a principle 

of combination exists; the second, when a principle of combination does not exist. 

The first combination proceeds with a sort of syllogistic pattern: 
- 
- 
- 

ideas belonging to group A and ideas belonging to group B can be combined, 
idea A’ belongs to group A; idea B’ belongs to group B, 
therefore ideas A’  and B’ can be combined. 

A typical combination of this nature is the addition of two numbers that were never 
added  together  before.  Such  a  combination  would  be  new,  but  it  would  not  be 
inventive. The reason is  precisely because the principle of combination exists already. 
Potentially, if not  actually, the  combination is  already in  the  possession  of mankind. 
Every combination of (existing) ideas, no matter how difficult, is not inventive when 
the principle of combination existed before. 

The non-inventive  combination is made with a faculty of the mind that is called 
reasoning, or logic, or inferential function. It  creates association of ideas by  deriving 
consequences from general principles. 

The second combination is done in spite of a lack of guidance. Even if it were not 
known that idea A’ and idea B’ can be combined, the ideas are combined nevertheless. 
The mind does not see the procedure, but the result. It is, so to speak, struck with the 
insight of the final point, without being bothered by  the procedure of the journey.  It 
goes from the starting point to the target, without intermehate  steps.  It is  comparable 
to  what Bergson described as  the  charge of the cavalry,  that does not  measure  every 
single yard, but falls upon the enemy with dash and bold “dun”. 

This  is  the  inventive  combination.  It  is  not  done  with  reasoning,  but  with  a 
different faculty of the mind, which can be called insight or intuition, or lateral thinking. 
It  creates associations of ideas  when  general principles of combination do not  exist. 
Therefore, “to invent” means to combine two  (or more) ideas when  the principle of 
combination does not exist, and can only be established by an act of insight. 

12  Mario Franzosi, L’invenzione, Giuffk, Milan, 1970, at  111. 

236 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Even if inventions are not created by logic, they are not illogical. Once they have 
been  created,  the  solution  appears logical. The ideas  that  are  combined  are fit  to be 
combined. Often, it seems that it would have not been logical to think differently. This 
is because even if a principle of combination did not exist before, it is the invention that 
establishes  a  principle  of  combination.  And  this  newly  established  principle  of 
combination  shows  the  logical  (we  could  now  say  “obvious”)  derivation  of  the 
invention from previous knowledge. It is like a riddle or a puzzle: before the solution it 
was not clear how to solve it, but afterwards it is obvious. 

The human  mind  cannot  reject  what it has  received  (it can only forget, but that 
only after some time). Once a principle  of combination is fixed in the mind, there is no 
way to erase it. This means that when an invention is made, the difficulty is dissolved, 
and what was an invention appears as the obvious result of logic.13 

A few principles can be expressed at this point: 
-  the only objective criterion to establish the presence of invention in indwidual 
cases  would  consist  of  findmg  out  whether  the  principle  of  combination 
existed before the invention; 
when  the  invention  is  made,  it  normally  becomes  impossible  to  deny  the 
existence of the principle  of combination; 
in any event, in order to ascertain whether an act of insight or an act of logic 
was  required  for  establishing a specific combination  of ideas,  it  is  safer and 
more appropriate to examine the situation before the invention than after. 

- 

- 

11.  THE PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINATION 

OF AN INVENTION 

It is appropriate here to recall once again the first proposition  of Article 56 of the 

EPC: 

“Inventive step: An  invention shall be  considered as  involving an  inventive  step  if,  having 
regard to the state of the art, it is not obvious to a person skilled in the art.” 
The following o u t h e ,  on the basis of the above discussion and on Article 56, is a 
proposal for  a procedure  to  establish in  individual  cases the  presence  of a  patentable 
invention.  The  ideal  procedure  would  consist  of more  than  the  three  or four  steps 

‘3  See  Technograph Printed  Circuit  v. Mills  and  Ruckley,  1972 R.P.C.  346, where Diplock  L.J. said: “Once an 
invention  has been made it is generally possible to postulate a combination of steps by which the invcntor might 
have arrived at the invention that he claims in his specification ifhe started from something that was already known. 
But it is  only because the invention has been made and has proved successful that it is possible to postulate from 
what starting point and by what particular combination of steps the inventor could have arrived at his invention.  It 
may be that taken in isolation none of the steps which it is now possible to postulate if taken in isolation appears to 
call for an inventive ingenuity. It is improbable that this reconstruction  a posteriori represents the mental process by 
which  the inventor  in fact arrived at his invention  but, even if it were, inventive ingenuity lay in perceiving that 
the final result which was the object of the inventor to achieve was attainable from the particular starting point and 
his selection of the particular combination of steps which would lead to that result.” 

NON-OBVIOUSNESS 

237 

followed by  the EPO (indicated above). Ideally, it should have ten steps. These are the 
following: 

Examination of the background of the invention. 
Identification of the closest prior art. 
Determination of the technical problem arising from the prior art. 
Identlfication of the person skilled in the art. 
Attribution to the expert of the common general knowledge. 
Attribution to the expert of the enhanced knowledge. 
Determination of the solution that the expert would find. 
Comparison of the expert’s solution with the invention. 
Chechng for obviousness. 
Application of the so-called “objective criteria” (or secondary indicia). 

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
As  will be shown, this is an ideal (i.e. theoretical) procedure, not  a practical one. 
From a practical point of view, it would be too burdensome to use this criterion, unless 
and  until  we  may  have  at  our  disposal  an  artificial  intelligence  that  could  do  the 
evaluation quickly and dependably. 

The  criterion  should  work  in  the  same  manner,  both  for  evaluating  the 
patentability of an application during the  examination, and the  validity of a  granted 
patent. The requirement for protection is the same for both. However, the criterion is 
more suitable for an examination of the validity of a granted examined patent, than for 
an evaluation during examination. 

In any event, an exposition and examination of this ideal procedure may give useful 

hints for a practical procedure, and avoid errors, as are frequently made. 

A.  Examination ofthe Background .f the Invention 

The first step is  the  examination of the background of the invention; when  the 
patent is granted, after examination, this can be done by reading at that part of the patent 
which mentions the prior art and the problems that the prior art does not  solve. This 
part is normally called “background of the invention”.14 T h s  first step is less easily done 
when  it  concerns  an  application,  unless  the  applicant  has  properly  positioned  his 
invention in the framework of the prior art. 

The background  of  the  invention  should  be  objectively, and  not  subjectively, 
formulated. It often happens that an invention is described by the applicant in relation 
with such prior art, which is known to him, while the existing relevant prior art may be 
dfferent. It may also happen that, after the grant, additional prior art is found which may 
change the background of the granted patent. In such instances the background of the 
invention as  resulting from the application or the patent may not be entirely relevant, 

14  EPO Guidelines, Part B, Chapten 111  3.14 and IV 2.7. 

238 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

and the proper background should be objectively construed. The problem is similar to 
the one that will be encountered for the third step (determination of the problem). 

The objective identification of the background of the invention cannot be made 
without  knowing  the  invention.  But  this  conflicts with  the  principle that  when  an 
invention  is  known  it  does not  seem  to  be  inventive,  and  thus  there  should be  no 
background. An  early comprehension of the invention allows a proper positioning of 
the technology in question, but tends to hang a cloud over the invention. In practice, 
however, the dificulty is not so substantial. In fact, in the case of a pending application, 
the background of the invention is identified by the Search Divisions of the Epo15 and 
the substantive examination is made by the Examining Division. Therefore, those who 
have  to  check  the  formulation  of  the  background  of  the  invention  made  by  the 
applicant, and those who have to establish non-obviousness, are dfferent persons. In the 
case of a granted patent, the background of the invention is established by the EPO, and 
not by  the person or body  (judge  who delivers a decision or attorney who delivers an 
opinion) that evaluates validity. 

B. 

Identijication  ofthe Closest Prior Art 

The following step is the identification of the closest prior art. The current practice 
of the EPO is  to  consider only one piece  of information, namely the  one that is  the 
closest.16 For example in Bayer,  Decision T 68/83,’’  it was debated at length which of 
two  prior  documents  was  to  be  considered  the  closest.  The  composition  of  the 
compounds described and the field of application was not considered the decisive factor 
and, in  the light of the problem sought for by  the  invention,  a  consideration of  the 
properties was held to be controlling. 

It would appear that &om a practical point ofview, and for the purposes ofwriting and 
examining a two-part c l a i m l k n e  part of whch can be dwided into a pre-characterizing 
part, followed by the expression “characterized by the fact that”, and then followed by the 
identification of one document as the most pertinent prior art is 
characterizing part-the 
convenient. It w d  then appear in the pre-characterizing part (Oberbegnf). However, it is 
not correct to limit the prior art against whch inventiveness has to be assessed to only one 
piece. In real life, an inventor possesses general and specific information, and all is used for 
proceedmg h-om  the problem to the  solution. Invention is the combination of existing 
ideas, but not necessarily of two ideas only (one can make an invention by combining the 
idea of a horse and an eagle to conceive a flying horse, but another can combine the ideas 
of eagle, lion and dragon to conceive the Etruscan Chimera). Very frequently a European 

Em  Case-Law,  at 112. 

‘5  EPC, Articles 17 and 92. 
‘6  EPO Guidelines, Part C ,  Chapter IV 9.5.  Consideration of two documents was held exceptional in T 176/89, 
17  Bayer/Thermoplastic  Moulding Compositions, O.J. 84/357. 
18  Or ‘yepson” as it is  called in  the United  States: see Ex PurteJepson,  1917 C.D. 62, 243 O.G. 525 (Ass’t 

Comm’r Pat. 1917), cited in D. Chisum, Chisum on  Patents, Vol. 3, at § 8.06(l)(c), 2000. 

NON-OBVIOUSNESS 

239 

patent mentions, in the background of the invention, more than one prior art. Why should 
the closest prior art be limited to one piece? 

In any case, the identification  of one or more pieces of prior art does not make a 
fundamental difference, provided that the prior art which is not used for step B. is used 
later for steps E. and F. 

C.  Determination ofthe Technical Problem Arisingfrom  the Prior Art 

The  t h r d  step  is  the  determination  of  the  technical  problem.  It  should  be  an 
objective problem w h c h  takes into consideration  the pertinent prior art, and not one 
which  may  be  imperfectly  identified  by  the  inventor,  perhaps  o n  the  basis  of  an 
insufficient consideration of the prior art. It should also be a problem resulting from (or 
suggested  by)  the  prior  art  (whether sufficiently  or not), and not  one suggested  and 
solved (in a more exact way) by the invention. 

In Speny, Decision T 13/84,19 it was stated: 
“When the problem to be solved and its solution are formulated in relation to the prior art 
. . . the invention will appear in a perspective which (may) somehow (be) different from that 
presented  in the application. Such a  situation is, however, inherent to  a  patent-granting 
procedure in which a research made after filing may reveal prior art, which is nearer to the 
invention . . . A reformulation of the problem . . . may become necessary  . . . It has been the 
constant jurisprudence of the Board  of Appeal  that  the nature of the problem has  to be 
determined on the basis of objective facts, in particular as appearing in the prior art revealed 
in the course of the proceedings,  which may be different from the prior art of which the 
inventor was actually aware at the time the application was filed.” 
In Giba Geigy, Decision T  1812/82,20 it was stated: 
“Examination with regard to inventive step is limited to the question of obviousness in the 
overall light of the state of the art and from the viewpoint of the closest prior art (looking 
forward) and not from that of the invention (looking backward).” 
And in Solway, Decision T 5/81,21 it was considered inadmissible that: 
“ ... a posteriori  analysis, i.e. an  interpretation of the prior document as influenced by  the 
problem solved by the invention, while the problem was neither mentioned or suggested 
(by the prior art not known to) the person skilled in the art.” 
Finally,  in  Schmid,  Decision  T  229/85,22 it  was  said  that  the  problem  must  be 

formulated: 

“. . . [so] as not to contain pointers to the solution, since including part of a solution offered 
by an invention in the statement of the problem must . . . necessarily result in an ex postfacto 
view being taken of inventive activity.” 

19  Sperry/Reformulation  ofthe Problem,  O.J. 1986, 253. 
20  Ciba Geigy/Spiro Compounds, O.J. 1984,401. 
21  Solway/Production  of Hollow Thermoplastic Objects, O.J. 1982, 249. 
22  Schmid/Ekhing Process, O.J. 1987,237. 

240 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

D.  Identification ofthe Person Skilled  in  the Art 

T h e  next step is the identification of the parameter that is used for the evaluation 
of non-obviousness.  This parameter  is  called  “the person  slulled  in the  art”,  or “the 
notional  addressee”,  or  “the  average  technician”  or  “the  slulled  technician”.  Non- 
obviousness  is  evaluated  on the basis  of  the  experience,  preparation  and skill of this 
hypothetical person.  In the Solway decision,23 it was said that the approach must not be 
too abstract: 

“ ... [and] removed  from the  thinking  of the person skilled  in  the art, which  [is]  oriented 
towards practicalities . . . The teaching of a document may have narrower implications for a 
person  skilled  in  the  art  and  broader  implications for  a  potential  inventor  who  first 
recognizes the problem  on which  his future  invention  is  to be  based. The assessment  of 
inventive step must consider solely the limited teaching for the person skilled in the art.” 
T h e  qualification of the expert has to be construed realistically,  in a manner close 

to actual practice:24 

T h e   nature  of  the  expert  can  be  derived  from  the  preparation  and  technical 

education of the person acting in the particular field of activity.25 However: 

“ ... if the  problem  prompts  the  person  skilled  in  the art  to seek  the  solution in  another 
technical field, the specialist in that field is the person qualified to solve the problem. The 
assessment  of whether the solution involves an inventive step must thereforc be based  on 
that specialist’s knowledge and ability.”26 
If an invention deals with two dlfferent technical fields, the technical abilities of the 
experts  of  both  fields  have  to  be  considered.27  In  the  English  case  General  Tire  v. 
Firestone28 it was stated: 

“If the art is one having a highly developed technology, the notional skilled reader to whom 
the document  is  addressed  may  not be a single person but  a team, whose combined skill 
would normally be eniployed in that art in interpreting and carrying into effect instructions 
such as those which are contained in the document to be construed.” 
Two  English  decisions  are  worth  mentioning  in  this  connection.  In  Beloit 

Technologies Inc. v.  Vulmet Paper Machinery  Inc.,29  Aldous L.J. said: 

“It has never been easy to differentiate between common general knowledge and that which 
is known by some. It has become particularly difficult with the modern  ability to circulate 
and retrieve information. Employees of some companies, with the use of libraries and patent 
departments will become aware of information soon after it is published in a whole variety 
of  documents;  whereas  others,  without  such  advantages,  may  never  do  so  until  that 

Polymerisationsbeschleun~~y, ZR 152/63, 5 November  1964, PMZ 1965, 207. 

23  Supra, footnote 21. 
24  Eisai/Benzodioxane  Denvates, T 334/92,  0.1. 1995, 38. 
2s  Borsenbugel, X ZR 60/75, IIC 1979, 254. 
26  Fives-Cail  BabcoUCleaning  Apparatus for  Conveyor  Belt,  T  32/81,  0.1.  1982,  225.  In  the  same  vein 
*7  23 W 147/87,30 March 1989, BPatGe 30, 188. 
28  1972 R.P.C. 457  (CA). See also  Cenentech v.  Wellcome, 1989 R.P.C. 147 (CA); T 95/88, 1991 EPOR 458; 
2y  1997 R.P.C. 489. 

Kin’n-Amgen/Erythropoietin, T 412/93,  1995 EPOR 629. See EPO Case-Law, p. 119. 

NON-OBVIOUSNESS 

24 1 

information is accepted generally and put into practice. The notional skilled addressee is the 
original man who may not have the advantages that some employees of large companies 
may have . . . It follows that evidence that a fact is known or even well known to a witness 
does not establish that that fact forms part of the common general knowledge. Neither does 
it  follow that  it will form part  of the  common  general knowledge if it  is  recorded  in  a 
document.” 
In  Valensi v. British Radio Corporation,30  Buckley L.J.  said 
“The hypothetical addressee is not a person of exceptional skill and knowledge, and he is not 
expected to exercise any invention or any prolonged research, inquiry or experiment. He 
must, however, be prepared to display a reasonable degree of skill and common knowledge 
of the art in making trials and to correct obvious errors in the specification if a means of 
correcting them can be easily found.” 

And in American decisions,31 six elements are considered 
- 
- 

type of problem encountered in art; 
prior art solution to those problems; 
rapidity with which innovations are made; 

- 
-  sophistication of the technology; 
- 
- 

educational level of the inventor; and 
educational level of active workers in the field. 
In Standard  Oil Co. v. American Cyanamid  C O . , ~ ~  
“. . . a person of ordinary skill in the art is also presumed to be one who thinks along the lines 
of conventional wisdom in the art and is not one who undertakes to innovate.” 

it was said: 

E.  Attribution to the Expert Ofthe Common General Knowledge 

T h e  next step is the attribution to the expert of the common general knowledge.33 
T h e  words of Sachs L.J., in General Tire and Rubber C o .  v. Firestone  Tire and Rubber 

Co. Ltd.34  are worth repeating here: 

“The common  general knowledge imputed  (to the  skilled  technician) must  of course be 
carefully  distinguished  from  what  in  patent  law  is  regarded  as  public  knowledge  .._ 
Common general knowledge is a different concept derived from a common-sense approach 
to  the  practical  question  of  what  would  in  fact  be  known  to  an  appropriately skilled 
addressee-the 
sort of man, good at his job, that could be found in real life. The two classes 
of documents which  call for consideration in relation to common general knowledge  . . . 
(are) individual patent specifications and widely read publications. As  to  the former, it is 
clear that indvidual patent specifications and their content do not normally form part of the 
relevant common general knowledge, though there may be specifications which are so well 

30  1973 R.P.C. 337 (CA). 
31  Custom  Accessories  v.  Jeffy-Allan  Industries,  807  F.  2d  955,  1  U.S.P.Q.  2d  1196  (Fed.  Cir.  1986); 
Environmental Design v.  Union Oil Co. ofcal.,  713 F.  2d 693 (Fed. Cir. 1983) cert. denied 464 U.S. 1043 (1984). 
32  774 F. 2d 448, 227 U.S.P.Q. 293, at 297 (Fed. Cir. 1985). 
33  Mario Franzosi, Novelty and Non-Obviousness--?7le  Relevant Prior Art, 3 J.W.I.P. 5, September 2000, p. 683; 

idem, Novita’ e non owieta’, Riv. Dir. Ind., 2000, I, at 63. 

34  1972 R.P.C.  457. 

242 

THE JOURNAL OF  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

known amongst those versed in the art that upon evidence of that state of affiirs they form 
part of such knowledge, and also there may occasionally be particular industries . . . in which 
the evidence may show that all specifications form part of the relevant knowledge. 
As regards scientific papers generally, it was said by Luxmoore J., in British Acoustic Film  u. 
Nettiefold  Productions, 1936 R.P.C. 221: ‘a piece of particular knowledge as disclosed in a 
scientific paper does not become  common general knowledge merely because it is widely 
read, and still less  because it  is  widely circulated, (but) when it  is  generally known  and 
accepted without  question by  the bulk of those who are engaged in the particular art; in 
other words, when it becomes part of their common stock of knowledge relating to the art.’ 

We  accept  these  passages  as  correctly stating in  general  the  law  on  this  point,  though 
reserving for further consideration whether the words ‘accepted without  question’ not be 
putting  the  position  rather  high  ... we  are  disposed to  substitute the  words  ‘generally 
regarded’ as a good basis for further action . . .”. 

F.  Attribution to the Expert ofthe Enhanced Knowledge 

After  having  attributed  to  the  expert  the  common  general  knowledge,  other 
knowledge  has  to be  attributed  to  the hypothetical  expert, namely  the enhanced  (or 
imputed) knowledge.  This argument also has been the subject of some of this author’s 
articles, some passages of which35 are pertinent here. 

“The second group of prior art (which is relevant to assess non-obviousness) is the enhanced 
knowledge that the good  expert would  necessarily  acquire when  confronted with  a new 
problem. This includes all textbooks (old and new), even if of not frequent consultation, 
patent literature and articles in the current technical literature. 
I think it would be reasonable to assume that a good expert should consult and have access 
to all published patent literature ofthe three major patent systems, namely the United States, 
Europe  (European Patent  Office)  and Japan,  which  represent  95  percent  of  all patent 
literature (important national patents also follow the US. and/or European and/or Japanese 
route), as well as the patent literature of the most industrialized countries, and also of non- 
industrialized countries which are specialized for the technology in question. In a decision 
of the European Technical Board [T 1/81, AEcr/Thennoplastic Sockets, O.J. 1981, p. 4393 it 
was  held that  ‘the expert must be  presumed to study patent  publications in  the relevant 
patent classes with particular interest.’ I think it would also be reasonable to assume that the 
expert should consult general technical publications and, for specific technologes, specific 
technical publications consulted in the specific field of endeavor.” 
However, not all the enhanced knowledge has  to be taken into consideration for 

the assessment of non-obviousness: 

“For the  evaluation of non-obviousness  the  expert has  all the  enhanced knowledge at  his 
disposal. But he has no reason to make use of all, and only uses what he considers pertinent. 
Perhaps  the  easiest  explanation  can  be  given  with  reference  to  the  known  alternative 
between ‘could’ and ‘would’.”36 

35  Franzosi, Novita’ e non owieta’, supra, footnote 33, at 65 and 71. 
36  See G.S.A. Szabo, The Problem  and Solution Approach in the European Pafent OfFce, IIC,  1995, p. 457, at pp. 475 

ef seq. 

NON-OBVIOUSNESS 

243 

Regard has  “to be  given to whether  a skilled person would  have arrived at the 

claimed solution to a problem (as compared to whether he could have done ~0).”37 

In T 2/83 (Rider), it was stated: 
“. . . the proper question to be asked was not whether the skilled man could have provided 
(a  certain  feature),  but  whether  he  would  have  done  so  in  expectation  of  some 
improvement or advantage.”3* 
And in Allied  Cobalt, Decision T 265/84: 
“While  the  skilled person  could  have  found  by  mere  chance  or  extensive  research  and 
testing . . . variants in the area  (of his endeavour), he had no good reason to move in such 
direction  . . . in  the  absence of  any  expectation of  improvement.  The assumption must 
therefore be that he would not have done so in the circumstances . . .”.39 
The question, as the Enghsh Court of Appeal in Norton Healthcure said: 
“. . . may depend upon whether it was obvious to try in the circumstances of that particular 
case and in those circumstances it will be necessary to take into account the expectations of 
achieving a good re~ult.”~O 

G.  Determination ofthe Solution  that  the Expert  Would Find 

The next step is the determination of the solution that the expert would find. The 
judge  or interpreter should wear the mantel of the skilled expert, with the  common 
general knowledge and the enhanced (or imputed) knowledge, and identifjr the obvious 
solution to  the  problem  that  said  pieces  of  information  suggest. This  can  be  called 
solution A. He or she should proceed, of course, with no knowledge of the invention, 
and also without inventive activity. Only plain rule of logic has to be applied. As said in 
an American case, Litton Systems: 

“Resolution of this issue entails a difficult process of turning back the clock to a time when 
the invention  was  made  and asking what  someone of ordinary skill  in the  art  may  have 
thought.’I4l 
In Discovision  v. Disctronics,  Pumfrey J. stated: 
“Once an invention has been made it is generally possible to postulate a combination of steps 
by which the inventor might have arrived at the invention that he claims in his specification 
if he started from something that was already known. But it is only because the invention 
has  been  made.. . that  it is  possible  to postulate from what  starting point  and  by  what 
particular combination of steps the inventor could have arrived at his 

T 203/93, T 713/93, T 223/94,  T 455/94 and T 280/95. 

37  Paterson, supra, footnote 10, p. 444. The most pertinent EPO decisions are T 2/83 and T 265/84, T 219187, 
38  Rider/Simeticone  Tablet, O.J. 1984, p. 265. 
39  Allied  Cobalt FoiL, 1987 E.P.O.R. 193. 
40  Norton Healthcare Lrd.  u. Beecham Group pfc, 19 June 1997. 
4’  Litton Systems, Itu. v. Honeywefi, Inc., 87 F. 3d 1559, 39 U.S.P.Q. 2d 1321 (Fed. Cir.  1996). 
42  29July 1998. See also supra, footnote 13. 

244 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

And in Siddell  v. Vickers t?  Sons Ltd.,43 Herschell L.J.  said: 
“Experience has shown that not a few inventions have been of so simple a character that once 
they have been  made known it was difficult  ... not to believe  that they must  have  been 
obvious to everybody.” 

H.  Comparison of the Expert’s  Solution  with the Invention 

The next  step is the comparison between  the solution that the expert could find 
(solution A)  and the invention covered by the patent  (patented solution). Solution A 
may be identical with, similar to, or different from the solution covered by the patent. 
Should the solution be identified there is  no invention. The solutions are similar 
but  not  identical when  they  are  expressed in  different form  but  may  be  considered 
technically equivalent. The yardstick to be used for assessing technical equivalency is the 
same as that applicable to establish novelty.44 

Solutions different from the invention, but that can be immediately understood by 
the basis  of common general knowledge and imputed knowledge and 
the expert-on 
without  need  for  research  or  consideration-as 
being  equivalent  (ie.  unsubstantial 
variations)  are  to  be  considered  identical.  Here  the  expert  does  not  look  at  a 
photographic identity between  the solution given in the patent  and the one found as 
above  (i.e. between  the patented  solution  and solution A), but  accepts and applies a 
variation  of  the  patented  solution  on  the  basis  of  said  common  and  enhanced 
knowledge. 

I. 

Checking for Obviousness 

If  the  solutions are  technically different, it  can  be  concluded  that  the  technical 
solution covered by the patent possesses an inventive level, i.e. it is non-obvious.  Since 
the  solution  that  the  expert  would  find  is  to  be  considered  obvious,  and  also  a 
technically  similar  solution  would  be  considered  obvious,  a  technically  different 
solution could not be considered obvious. This follows from the principle of identity: 
-  if the solution (A) available to the expert (as discussed in Section H. above) is 
identical to the alleged invention claimed in the patent (patented solution), or 
is substantially identical: 

- 

then the alleged invention (patented solution) is not an invention; 
and therefore a different solution is an invention. 

- 
(Patented  solution  =  Solution  A  is  not  an  invention;  Patented  solution  # 

Solution A is an invention.) 

43  1987 R.P.C.  292, at 304. 
44  Franzosi, Novifa’e now owieta’, supra, footnote 33, at 65 and 75. 

NON-OBVIOUSNESS 

245 

It  remains  to  be  seen whether  a  patented  solution  which  is  not  technically 
similar to the one reached by the expert, as discussed in Section G. above, but which 
is  nevertheless  different  from  a  non-inventive  aspect,  can  be  considered  an 
invention.45 

A dstinction must be made here between technical solutions which are different 
in both a horizontal and a vertical manner. A horizontally hfferent solution is different 
fiom the solution that the expert could find, but not so much from the prior art. It is 
simply another possible technical solution that the expert could find-perhaps  more or 
less simple, perhaps more or less burdensome. The expert could find solution A, but he 
can also find solution A’.  Therefore A’  is not inventive-even it is not the first solution 
that the expert could have found-because 
it is nevertheless a solution that the expert 
could find. A vertically different solution is different from the solution that the expert 
would find, and also from the prior art. It may be a simple solution starting from the 
solution that the expert could find, but not starting from the prior art. Starting from the 
prior art the expert could find solution A, starting fiom Solution A, but not from the 
prior art, he could find solution A’. Solution A’ may be non-inventive with respect to A, 
but  inventive with  respect  to  the  prior  art.  Its  non-obviousness  cannot be  denied. 
A  different conclusion would lead  to  a  possible  denial  of the  inventive level of  all 
contributions, since it is always possible to demonstrate, once the invention is made, that 
the  result  can  be  arrived at  with  a  series, short  or  long,  of non-inventive passages. 
A  technical solution, which is  technically different from the solution that the  expert 
could (obviously) find, and is also distant from the prior art, is necessarily an invention. 
The said solution should not be  examined further to check how much is technically 
different from the solution that the expert could find. 

J. 

Application  ofthe So-called  “Objective Criteria” (or Secondary Indicia) 

The above-mentioned analysis cannot be substituted by the application of the so- 
called “objective criteria”. However, these criteria can be applied to verify a conclusion 
already reached, or reach a conclusion in case of doubt. They should not be sufficient 
per se to resolve the evaluation of non-obviousness. 

45  This problem should not be confused with, or be considered akin to, the one evidenced by  the Formstein 
decision of  1986 (General Federal  Supreme Court, 29 April  1986, 18 IIC 795, 1987) examined also  in  Wilson 
Sporting  Goods  (904 F.  2d  677,  14 U.S.P.Q. 2d  1942, Fed.  Cir.  1990, cert. denied, 498 U.S. 992,  1990) and 
anticipated by Gillem (1913, 30 R.P.C. 465, at 480). The Fomtein defence, or defence ofthe free state of the art, 
implies that he who reproduces the prior art, or a technical solution which is not inventively different from the 
prior art, is not an infringer. The defence of the free state of the art is possible when the technical solution under 
scrutiny  is  simdar  (i.e.  not  different  in  an inventive  manner)  from  the  common general knowledge  and  the 
enhanced knowledge. But said exception should not be applicable when the technical solution under scrutiny is 
different from the solution that can be reached by the expert on the basis of the common general knowledge and 
the enhanced knowledge. The exception is possible if the solution under scrutiny is non-inventively different from 
the knowledge mentioned under Sections E and F, but not G. 

246 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Pagenberg, in an article in the IIC, in  1978,46 lists nineteen criteria that may assist 
in the  determination of an inventive level. These  criteria relate to  factors which are 
based  on facts taken from the world at large, and not  from the  examination of single 
inventions. His analysis is still applicable. These criteria are: 

- 

- 

-  Commercial success: The rational for this criterion is that the purchaser is to be 
considered  as  an  objective judge  who  spends  money  only  for  valuable 
contributions to the state of the art.47 
Overcoming  dtjiculties:  The  time  during  which  the  barrier  of  the  prior  art 
existed allows an objective measurement of the importance of  the technical 
contribution. 
Satisfaction of a long-existant  need  Considering that the need for technological 
improvement is  generally regarded as the main impulse of technical advance, 
a need which has existed for a long time may indicate that no one was able to 
remove the difficulties and solve the problem.48 
Failure  and  unsuccessful  attempts  of experts: Attempts  are  undertaken if a  need 
exists and experts are not able to find a solution.49 
Increased performance, greater productivity: The industry would have introduced 
the better solution in order to beat competition if it had been aware of the 
solution. 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Cheaper  and  more  economical production:  The industry would have reduced the 
manufacturing process and costs, if it had been aware of the solution. 
Simplijcation  of  machines,  construction, manufacturing methods,  etc.: Modification 
of complicated machines and production  lines or processes  by  more  simple 
devices has always been a most convincing manifestation of inventive skill. 
Technical progress, advance in the art: Technical progress in general is regarded as 
one  of  the  inherent  goals  of  the  patent  system,  either  in  the  form  of  the 
discovery  of  a  better  solution  (Fortschritt)  or  addition  of  a  new  technical 
solution (Bereicherung der  Technik). 
Pioneer  inventions:  Creation of totally new industries or branches of industry, 
which did not exist before the invention, is particularly significant. 
Disbeliefand scepticism of experts: If the experts in the field consider the solution 

46  The Evaluation offhe Inventive Step in the European Patent System-More  Objective Standards Needed, Vol. 9, Irc 
1 and 121 (1978). See also Note, Subtests ofl\ion-O6viousness: A Non-Technical Approach to Patent  Validity, 112 U.Pa. 
L. Rev. 1169, 1964. 

47  Graham v. John Deere  Co., 383 U.S. 1, 17,  1966. 
48 Ibid., at 16; Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co. v.Johnson &Johnson  Orrhopaedics, 976 F.  2d 1559 (Fed. 
49  Graham, supra, footnote 47, at 17. 

Cir. 1992). 

NON-OBVIOUSNESS 

247 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

found by the inventor with scepticism but nevertheless the said solution meets 
success, it is generally non-obvious.50 
New and unexpected results: If the invention is not simdar to references available 
in the literature or art, this could be a symptom of non-obviousness.51 
Licence  rights acquiredjom the inventor: The granting of licences on the patent 
shows the commercial success and, therefore, the real need for the invention. 
Copying or infn'ngement ofthe invention by competitors: If a competitor takes  the 
risk of the expense of an infiingement suit, it could mean that he is convinced 
that he will have financial benefits from the invention52 
Circumvention: If a competitor tries to develop a substitute for an invention (but 
remains  within  the  scope  of  protection),  it  means  that  he  believes  in  the 
invention. 
Professional recognition, laudatory comments ofothers working in the art: All forms of 
professional recognition (i.e. articles in scientific journals and/or speeches) can 
be relevant indicia of valid1ty.53 
Costly and long-luting research and deveiopment: If the inventor spent a significant 
amount of money and time, it could mean that the solution finally reached is 
not obvious. 
Taking into account ofthegrantingproceeding, parallel applications abroad and previous 
patent  litigation: The fact  that  the  granting proceeding of the  patent  or the 
existence of the patent meets a lot of opposition is an indication that technical 
experts have confirmed its importance. 
Long-existant prior  art: If some elements relevant for the invention have been 
available for a long period in a different field of technology, but were not used, 
it means that their combination is not obvious. 

-  Special choice among a multitude ofpossible solutions: If the inventor, at the start of 
his  research, disposes of a multitude of possible  solutions and he finally finds 
the only one which really works, the solution may be non-obvious. 

Secondary  considerations  only  merit  attention  when  a  nexus  between  the 
invention and the objective criteria can be established. For instance, commercial success 
may come about for reasons completely unrelated to the invention, and attributable to 
the  patentee's  marketing  capabdity.  A  careful  analysis  of  objective  criteria,  and  in 

so  United States v. A d a m ,  383 U.S. 39 (1946). 
5'  Lindemann Maschinenfabrik  GmbH v. American Hoist and Denidz Co., 730 F.  2d 1452 (Fed. Cir. 1984). 
s2  Ashland  Oil, Inc.  v. Delta Resins  and Refi(ltones,  776 F.  2d 281  (Fed. Cir. 1985) cert. den, 475 U.S.  1017 

(1986). 

53  Interconnect Planning COT. v. Feil, 774 F. 2d 1132 (Fed. Cir. 1985). 

248 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

particular of commercial success has been done by  Laddie J. in Haberman v.]ackel  Znt., 
and is attached as an Annex to this article. 

CONCLUSION 

As said earlier, and in conclusion, this course of action is more of a logical guideline 
than a practical one. To  ascertain in this manner the presence of an invention would 
require substantial efforts, if not of the same level, at least almost comparable to the ones 
made  to  succeed in  the  invention.  This  course  of action  is  the  closest  to  the  legal 
paradigm, and should be taken into consideration even if it is not applied, so as to avoid 
the most severe and primitive mistakes. 

Annex 

Habeman v. Jackel  Int., 1999 F.S.R. 683: Comments by Laddie J, 

“In all cases where obviousness is an issue the court is trying to look back to what paths would 
have been seriously considered by a notional skilled (but uninventive) person in the relevant art at the 
priority date. The task is made more difficult because the patentee’s development is already known to 
the parties and the court. Therefore inevitably the court will know not only that a solution is possible 
but  what  it  is.  Many patented inventions  operate  in  accordance with  simple principles of physics, 
chemistry or other sciences. It is normally easy to understand why they work. From this it is but a short 
step to thinking  that a competent technician  in the art would have realized, starting from the  same 
simple principles, why the solution proposed by the patentee should have worked. So, worlung from 
those principles, the solution must be obvious. In such cases it is also  easy to take the relevant expert 
witnesses under  cross-examination through  a series of logical steps which  lead to the solution. The 
simpler the solution,  the easier it is  to  explain. The easier it is  to explain, the more  obvious it can 
appear. This is not always Lir to inventors. 

If skilled workers in the art had looked at the priority date both at the prior art relied on and had 
turned their minds to solving a known problem  their reactions would come closer to showing what 
would have been the approach of the hypothetical skilled man. Unfortunately  evidence in that form 
rarely exists.  However  some insight into the thinking of those in the art at the priority  date can be 
provided by evidence of commercial success. To this end patentees sometimes prove schedules of sales 
to support  their  claims to inventiveness. In most  cases this type  of evidence is of little or no value 
because  it  does no  more  than  show that  a  particular item  or process which  employs the  patented 
development, has sold well. The mere existence of large sales says nothing about what problems were 
being tackled by those in the  art nor, without  more,  does it demonstrate that success in the market 

NON-OBVIOUSNESS 

249 

place has anything to do with the patented development  nor whether it was or was not the obvious 
thing to do. After all, it is sometimes possible to make large profits by sehng well an obvious product. 
But in some circumstances commercial success can throw light on the approach and thought processes 
which pervade the industry as a whole. The plaintiffs rely on commercial success here. To be of value 
in helping to determine whether a development is obvious or not it seems to me that the following 
matten are relevant: 

What was the problem which the patented development addressed. Although sometimes a 
development may be the obvious solution to another problem,  that is not fiequently the 
case. 
How long had that problem existed. 
How significant was the problem seen to be. A problem which was viewed in the trade as 
trivial  might  not  have  generated  much  in  the  way  of efforts to  find  a solution.  So  an 
extended  period  during which  no solution was  proposed  (or proposed as  a  Commercial 
proposition)  would  throw  little light  on whether,  technically, it  was  obvious.  Such  an 
extended period ofinactivity may demonstrate no more than that those in the trade did not 
believe that finding a solution was commercially worth the effort. The fact, if it be one, 
that they had miscalculated the commercial benefits to be achieved by the solution says little 
about its technical obviousness and it is only the latter which  counts. On the other hand 
evidence which  suggests that  those in the  art were  aware of the problem  and had  been 
trying to find a solution will assist the patentee. 
How widely known was the problem and how many were likely to be seeking a solution. 
Where the problem was widely known to many in the relevant art, the greater the prospect 
of it being solved quickly. 
What prior art would have been likely to be known to all or most of those who would have 
been expected to be involved in finding a solution. A development may be obvious over a 
piece of esoteric prior art of which most in the trade would have been ignorant. If that is 
so,  commercial  success  over  other,  less  relevant,  prior  art  will  have  much  reduced 
significance. 
What other solutions were put forward in the period leading up to the publication of the 
patentee’s development.  This  overlaps with  other  factors. For  example it illustrates that 
others in the art were aware of the problem and were seeking a solution. But it also is of 
relevance in that it may indicate that the patentee’s development was not what would have 
occurred to the relevant workers. This factor must be treated with care. As has been said 
on more than one occasion, there may be more than one obvious route round a technical 
problem. The existence of alternatives does not prevent each of them fkom being obvious. 
O n  the other hand where the patentee’s development would have been expected to be at 
the forekont of solutions to be found yet it was not and other, more expensive or complex 
or less satisfactory, solutions were employed instead, then this may suggest that the ex post 
facto assessment that the solution was at the forefront of possibilities is wrong. 
To  what  extent were  there  factors which  would  have held hack  the  exploitation of the 
solution  even  if it was  technically obvious. For  example it may be  that  the materials or 
equipment necessary to exploit the solution were only available belatedly or their cost was 
so high as to act as a commercial deterrent. On the other hand ifthe necessary materials and 
apparatus were  readily  available at  reasonable cost,  a  lengthy  period  during  which  the 
solution was not proposed is a factor which is consistent with lack of obviousness. 
How well has the patentee’s development been received. Once the product or process was 
put into commercial operation, to what extent was it a commercial success. In lookmg at 
this. it is leitimate to have regard not only to the success indicated bv exeloitation bv the 

250 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

patentee  and  his  licencees but  also  to  the  commercial  success  achieved  by  infringers. 
Furthermore  the number  of infringers may reflect on  some  of the  other  bctors  set  out 
above. For example if there are a large number of infringers it may be some indication of 
the  number  of members  of the  trade  who  were  likely to  be  looking for alternative or 
improved products (see (iv) above). 
To what extent can it be shown that the whole or much of tile commercial success is due 
to  the  technical merits  of the  development,  i.e.  because  it  solves the  problem.  Success 
which is largely attributable to other factors, such as the commercial power of the patentee 
or his licensee, extensive advertising focusing on features which  have nothing to do with 
the  development,  branding  or  other  technical  features  of  the  product  or  process,  says 
nothing about the value of the invention. 

(i) 

I  do not suggest that this is  exhaustive. But it does represent factors which taken together may 

point towards or away from inventiveness. Most of them have been addressed in this case.” 

After analysing the evidence he came to his conclusion: 
“I  have not found the decision on validity in this case easy.  [The Defendants] arguments on 
obviousness are powerful. At times I could not see how this could be anything but obvious. But 
in the end I have not been persuaded. [The Plaintiff] has taken a very small and simple step but 
it appears to me to be a step which any one of the many people in this trade could have taken at 
any time  over at least the preceding ten years or more.  In view of the obvious benefits which 
would flow &om it, I have come to the conclusion that had it really been obvious to those in the 
art it would have been found by other earlier, and probably much earlier. It was there under their 
very noses. As  it was it fell to a comparative outsider to see it. It is not obvious. This finding can 
be expressed in the language used by Hoffmann  L.J.  as he was in STEP v.  Emson  (I19931 RPC 
513). M n  Haberman’s patent discloses something sufficiently inventive to deserve the grant of a 
monopoly. 
One problem  that we do not  face is any ddference  of approach, at least amongst the  English 
Judges. There is also considerable reluctance on the part of the Court of Appeal to interfere with 
a finding as to obviousness, almost as matter of principal, as was made clear in Bourns v. Raychem 
(unreported 17.12.98)  by Aldous L.J.,  who observed that: ‘In any case, I would have been slow 
to come to a different conclusion when the question of obviousness is, as has often been said, a 
jury-type  question.’ ” 


