Protecting Traditional Knowledge 

A n  Overview of  a Developing Area .f Intellectual Property Law 

Bernard O’CONNOR* 

“Knowledge is power. ” 

“A man can only attain knowledge with the help  o j  those who possess it . . , 

One must learnfrom him who knows. ” 

George Gurdjieff (1 866-1 949) 

Francis Bacon (1561-1626) 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The aim of this article is  to give an overview of the  complex and controversial 
nature  of the  legal protection  of traditional knowledge.’  The article examines what 
traditional knowledge is and the arguments for recognizing and protecting it. Next the 
article  examines  the  international  protection  provided  by  the  Convention  on 
Biological Diversity (CBD) and the issue of biopiracy. This issue is illustrated by several 
cases,  namely, Neem,  Turmeric,  Ayahuasca,  Hoodia  Cactus and  Basmati  Rice.  Then the 
application of  existing intellectual property  rights  to  traditional knowledge  on  the 
international and national level is examined, in particular explaining the problems and 
benefits  of  protecting  the  names  of  traditional  products  through  assimilation  to 
geographical indication law. The article also looks at some ofthe new suigeneris systems 
for  the  protection  of  traditional  knowledge  and  addresses  the  issue  of  traditional 
knowledge in the World Trade Organization ( W T ~ ) ,  examining the issue  under the 
Agreement on Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights  (TRIPS) and the 
present positions of WTO Members in connection to the revision of Article 27.3(b) of 
TRIPS. 

cchttp://www.oconnor.ben) . 

* Senior  Partner  at  O’Connor  and  Company,  European  Lawyers,  Brussels,  Belgium 
The author would like to thank his colleague Irina Kireeva for research and comments on this article, and 
also Jean-Charles Van Eeckhaute ofthe EC Commission for comments on an earlier draft. Any opinions or mistakes 
are those of the author. He may be contacted at: ccbe.oconnor@oconnor.bex 
1  G. Dutfield,  Intellectual  Property Rights,  Trade and  Biodiversity, Earthscan Publications Ltd., London, 2002; 
B. Dasgupta, Patent Lies and Latent Danger: A Study ofthe Political Economy ofPaten& in India, Economic and Political 
Weekly, 17-24 April 1999; M. Ruiz, The International Debate on Traditional Knowledge as %or  Art in the Patent System: 
Issues  and  Options for  Developing  Countries,  Center  for  International  Environmental  Law  (CIEL), available  at: 
cchttp://www.ciel.org/puhlicationsn. 

(see  on 

678 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

11.  WHAT IS TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE? 

Local communities have always generated specific knowledge which has been used 
for shorter and longer periods and informally passed  from generation to generation or 
from group  to  group. This traditional knowledge can  be  defined as  the  knowledge, 
innovations and  practices  of indigenous peoples and local communities.2  Traditional 
knowledge can be considered to include knowledge oE 

- 

plants and animals and their properties; 
minerals and soils and their properties; 
combinations of organic and inorganic matters; 

means of enhancing individual health and welfare; 
means of enhancing collective health and welfare; 

- 
- 
-  processes  and technologies; 
- 
- 
-  artistic expressions. 
Traditional knowledge is usually collective knowledge. Sometimes, due to parallel 
development or  due to  the  exchange  of knowledge,  communities with  similar eco- 
systems, cultures  or  problems  can  have  the  same  or  similar  traditional  knowledge 
which, in turn, is or is not, expressed in a similar fashion. For those indigenous or local 
communities that  did  not  have  a  written  tradition,  traditional knowledge  takes  the 
form of stories, songs, folklore, proverbs, cultural values, beliefs, rituals, community 
laws,  local  language,  culinary  recipes  and  agricultural  practices,  including  the 
development of plant species and animal breeds.  It is therefore extremely difficult to 
determine  with  accuracy  which  communities  are  the  rightful  owners  of  a  certain 
knowledge,  or  the  relationship  between 
traditional  knowledge  and  different 
communities. 

111.  RECOGNITION OF THE IMPORTANCE  OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE 

Traditional knowledge, developed from experience gained over time and adapted 
to a local culture and environment,  has  always played-and 
important 
role in the  daily lives of the  majority  of people  globally and is  considered to be an 
essential part of cultural identities.3 It is vital to the food security and health of millions 
of people in  the  developing, and even  developed, world.“ In  many  developing and 

still plays- 

See  generally, Dutfield,  id.;  M.  Khor,  Intellectual  Property,  Biodiversity  and  Sustainable  Development,  Third 
World Network, Penang, Malaysia, 2002; N.S. Gopalakrishnan, Protection of Traditional Knowledge-The Needfor a 
in India, 5 J.W.I.P.  5, September 2002, p. 725; U N  Committee on Trade and Development, The 
Sui Ceneris LAW 
TRIPS Agreement  and  Developing  Countries; UNCTAD, New York  and Geneva,  1996; Comnlission  on Intellectual 
Property  Rights, Integrating  Intellectual  Property  Righhts  and  Development  Policy,  2002;  G.  Tansey, Trade, Intellectual 
Property,  Food  and  Biodiversity,  London, 1999; M. Blakeney and P. Drahos (eds.), IP in  Biodiversity  and Agriculture: 
Regulating the Biosphere, Sweet & Maxwell, London, 2001; Costa e Silva, The Protection oflntellectual Propertyfor Local 
and Indigenous  Communities, European Intellectual Property Review, 17, 1995, p. 546. 

also be considered traditional knowledge. 

3  The literature as yet does not examine whether enlightenment values or constitutional law-based culture can 
4  “Old wives tales” are still in common use. 

PROTECTING  TRADITIONAL  KNOWLEDGE 

679 

least-developed countries, traditional medicines provide the only affordable treatment 
available to poor people.5 

Knowledge of the healing properties of certain plants has been the source of many 
modern medicines. In addition, the use  and continuous development by local farmers 
of plant varieties, and the knowledge associated  with  them, play  an important role in 
agricultural systems in developing countries. 

Traditional knowledge has been translated into commercial benefits by providing 
leads for development of useful products and processes. The valuable leads provided by 
traditional knowledge save time, money and investment of the modern biotech industry 
into  any  research  and  product  development.  The  question  that  now  needs  to  be 
addressed is  whether  a share of benefits should accrue to  “creators” and “holders” of 
traditional knowledge, and if so, how. 

The  means  of  preservation,  development,  protection  and  equitable  use  of 
tramtional knowledge are under increasing attention in a range of policy discussions on 
matters as diverse as food and agriculture, the environment (notably the conservation of 
biological  diversity),  health,  including  traditional  medicines,  human  rights  and 
inhgenous issues, cultural policy, and aspects of trade and economic development. The 
role  of intellectual property  systems  in  relation to  traditional knowledge has  been  a 
particular  focus  of  discussion  in  a  number  of  these  policy  contexts  in  various 
international fora. 

Protection and recognition of the traditional knowledge is a recent phenomenon 
international  community.  In  198 1  the  World  Intellectual  Property 
in 
the 
Organization  (WIPO) and  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific and  Cultural 
Organization  (UNESCO) adopted  a  Model  Law  on  Folklore.6  The  concept  of 
farmers’ rights  was  introduced  in  1989 by  the  Food  and Agriculture  Organization 
(FAo)  into its International  Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources,7 and in  1992 
the  Convention  on  Biological  Diversity  highlighted  the  need  to  promote  and 
preserve  traditional  knowledge.8  To  date,  however,  there  are  no  comprehensive 
rules  on the protection  of traditional knowledge,  as  for  other  classes  of intellectual 
property. 

5  According  to  the  World  Health  Organization (WHO) Fact  Sheet  No.  271, June  2002,  in  developing 
countries, up to 80 percent of the population depend on tramtional medicines to help meet their healthcare needs. 
See more on: c~http://www.who.int/medicines/organization/factheet271 .doc),. 

6  See also:  (chttp://www.unesco.or~), “Culture”, “Copyright”, “Folklore”. It should be  noted that  certain 
authors make a distinction between folklore and traditional knowledgesee, for example, J.C. Weiner, Protection 
ofFolklore: A Political and Legal Challenge, IIC International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law, 1987, 
18/01,  pp.  56-92;  Ch.  Haight  Farley,  Protecting  Folklore  .f Indigenous  Peoples:  Lr  Intellecrual  Property  the  Awwer? 
30  Connecticut Law  Review  1,  1997-and 
others  tend  to  include folklore  into  traditional  knowledgesee 
Dutfield, supra, footnote 1. 
cchttp://www.fao.org/ag/cgrfa/iu. htm,,. 

7  Resolution  8/83,  adopted  at  the  22nd  Session  of  the  FAO  Conference,  Rome,  1983;  avalable  at: 
*  The CBD came into force on 29 December 1993. See, for more information: ((http://www.biodiv.orgo. 

680 

THE  

Iv.  THE CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY AND TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE 

Biological diversity encompasses all species of plants, animals and micro-organisms 
and  variations  between  them,  and  the  eco-systems  of  which  they  form  a  part. 
Traditional knowledge associated with biological resources is an intangible component 
of the resource itself. 

The  CBD is  the  only  binding  international  agreement  that  contains  explicit 
reference  to  traditional  knowledge.  The CBD seeks  to  promote  the  conservation  of 
biodiversity and the equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic 
resources.9 It asserts the  sovereign  rights  of nations  over their  national  resources, and 
their  right  to  determine  access  according  to  national  legislation  with  the  aim  of 
facilitating the sustainable use of these resources, promoting  access and their common 
use. 

As stated in the Preamble to the Convention, the Member countries recognize the 
desirability  of  sharing  equitably  the  benefits  arising  from  the  use  of  traditional 
knowledge.  Its Article S(i) provides: 

“Subject  to its national legislation, respect, preserve  and maintain  knowledgc, innovations 
and practices of indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifcstyles relevant 
for the conservation and  sustainable use  of biological  diversity and  promote their wider 
application  with  the  approval  and  involvement  of  the  holders  of  such  knowledge, 
innovations and practices and encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from 
the utilization of such knowledge, innovations and practices.” 
Like most provisions of the CBD, Article S(i) provides for a general framework and 

policy objectives within which States can act to fulfil their obligations. 

V.  CASES OF BIOPIRACY OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE 

A number of cases relating to traditional knowledge  have attracted international 
attention.  These  cases  involve  what  is  often  referred  to  as  “biopiracy”.lo  In  the 
well-known  cases  of  Neem,  Turmeric  and  Ayahuasca,  the  issue  arose  from  the 
granting  of  patent  protection 
to  inventions  relating  to  traditional  knowledge 
which  was  already  in  the  public  domain.  In  these  cases,  patents  were  issued 
because 
traditional 
knowledge.11 

the  patent  examiners  were  not  aware  of 

the  relevant 

‘i For more information see Dutfield, supra, footnote 1; and Khor, supra, footnote 2. 
lo  There  is  no  accepted  definition  of  “biopiracy”.  The  Action  Group  on  Erosion,  Technology  and 
Concentration  (<<http://www,etcgroup.org>) defines  it  as  “the  appropriation  of  the  knowledge  and  genetic 
resources of farming and indigenous communities by individuals or institutions seelung exclusive monopoly control 
(usually patents or plant breeders’ rights) over these resources and knowledge.” 

l 1   See also Campaign against Biopiracy, Research Foundation for Science, Technology and Ecology, New Delhi, 

India, November 1999. 

PROTECTING TRADITIONAL  KNOWLEDGE 

681 

A.  The Neem Case 

The Neem case was a landmark case it was the first time that a patent based on the 
traditional knowledge of a developing country had been successfully challenged. There 
were  several issues raised  in this case,  the most important  of which was  the concern 
that if a multinational corporation could usurp traditional knowledge through patents, 
this would lead to  the  erosion of the  diversity of the  neem tree,  neem  seeds would 
become  costly  and  thus  not  be  available to  poor  farmers, and  therefore  developing 
countries and, in particular, India, would be robbed of their rights to use neem trees as 
they saw fit. 

Neem  (Azadirachta  indica)  is  a  tree  from  India  and  other  parts  of  South  and 
Southeast Asia.  It is now planted across the tropics because of its properties as a natural 
medicine, pesticide and fertilizer.12 Neem extracts can be used against hundreds of pests 
and fungal diseases that attack food crops, the oil extracted from its seeds is used to treat 
colds and flu and, mixed in soap, it is believed to offer low-cost relief from malaria, skin 
diseases and even meningitis. 

In  1994,  the  European  Patent  Office  granted  a  European  patent  to  the  U.S. 
Corporation W.R. Grace and the U.S. Department  of Agriculture for a  “method for 
controlling fungi on plants by the aid of a hydrophobic extracted neem 0i1.”13 

In June  1995, a legal opposition against the grant of this patent was filed by Magda 
Aelvoet, Member  of the European Parliament, on behalf of the  Green Group in the 
European  Parliament,  Brussels,14  Dr  Vandana  Shiva,  on  behalf  of  the  Research 
Foundation for Science, Technology, and Natural Resource Policy, New Delhi, and the 
International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements, based in Germany.15 

The evidence was  submitted that the fungicidal effect of hydrophobic extracts of 
neem  seeds was  known  and  used  for  centuries on  a  broad  scale  in  Inda,  both  in 
Ayurvedcl6  medicine  to  cure  dermatological  diseases  and  in  tradtional  Indan 
agricultural practice to protect crops from being destroyed by fungal infections. Since 
this traditional Indian knowledge was in the public domain for centuries, it was argued 
that  the patent  application for neem lacked two  basic  statutory requirements for  the 
grant of a European patent-namely, 

novelty and inventive step. 

In  addtion, the  opponents  of  the  patent  charged  that  the  fungicidal  method 
claimed in the patent was based on one single plant variety (Azadirachta indica) and hence 

12  See more in Neem, A  Treefor Solving  Global Problems,  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1992; 
Intellectual Piracy and the Neem Patents, Research Foundation for Science, Technology and Natural Resource Policy, 
Dehradun, I d a ,  1993. 

13  European Patent No. 436257 was granted bv the European Patent Office on 14 September 1994. 
14  See more on: cchttp://www.greenGefa.org>>.‘ 
‘5  See more on: whttp://www.ifoam.orp. 
16  Ayurveda is a system  of healing that originated in India thousands of years ago. The word “Ayumeda” is 
made  up  of two Sanskrit words:  Ayu which means life and  Veda which means the knowledge.  Find more on: 
((http://www.ayuNed.com)). 

-. 

682 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

resulted in at least partially monopolizing this single plant variety. It was pointed out that 
since the European Patent Convention (EPc) explicitly prohibits  the patenting of plant 
varieties, the patent should be revoked. 

O n  15 June  1999, the Opposition Board of the European Patent Office held that 
due to the fact that “all features of the present claim [of the patent] have been disclosed 
to the public prior to the patent application during field trials in the two Indian districts 
Punc and Sangli” ofMaharashtra, Western India, in summer 1985 and 1986, it appeared 
to be “mere  routine  work for a  skilled person  to  add  an emulsificr in an appropriate 
amount”  and that therefore “the present subject-matter  was considered  not to involve 
an inventive step.” The patent, therefore, was revoked by the European  Patent Office 
in May 2000. 

B.  The Turmeric  Case 

In spite of the fact that  the  decision  on the  Turmeric case appeared  later than  the 

revocation of the neem patent, this case attracted even more attention &om the public. 

Turmeric  (Curcurnu  longu)  is  a  plant  of the  ginger family yielding safion-coloured 
rhizomes. It  has  been  used  as  a dye, medicine  and  flavouring since 600 B.C. In  1280, 
Marc0 Polo described Turmeric as “a vegetable with the properties of saffron, yet it is not 
really safk~n.” Turmeric has been used medcinally throughout Asia to treat stomach and 
liver ailments. It also was used externally to heal sores and as a cosmetic. 

In  1995, two  Indian nationals at the University of Mississippi  Medical Center were 
granted a U.S.  patent  on “use of turmeric  in wound  he&ng.”’7  The Indlan Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)~~ 
requested the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office 
(USPTO) to re-examine the patent.19 

The  CSIR argued  that  turmeric  has  been  used  for  thousands  of years  for  healing 
wounds and rashes and therefore its medicinal use was not novel. Their claim was supported 
by documentary evidence of tradltional knowledge, includmg an ancient Sanskrit text and 
a paper published in 1953 in the Journal of the Indian Medical Association. The USPTO 
upheld the CSIK’S objections and revoked the patent in August 2002. 

C.  The Ayahuasca  Case 

The Ayahumcu case concerns both substance and procedures. For generations, shamans 
(medicine men) of indigenous tribes throughout the Amazon Basin have processed the bark 
of Bunisteriopsis caupi to produce a ceremonial drink known as “ayahuasca”. The shamans use 

” US. Patent No. 5401504 was granted for the use ofturmeric powder as a wound healing agent on 28 March 

1995. 

‘ 8   Scc, for more information, the official Website (chttp://www.csir.res.inn. 
lY See, for more information, the official Website c(http://www.uspto.gov)). 

PROTECTING TRADITIONAL  KNOWLEDGE 

683 

ayahuasca (which means “vine of the SOLIY’)  in religious and healing ceremonies to diagnose 
and treat Illnesses, meet with spirits, and &vine the future. 

An American, Loren Miller, obtained U.S. Plant Patent No. 5751 in June  1986, 
granting rights over an alleged variety of Banisteriopsis  caapi which had been called “Da 
Vine”.  The  patent  description stated  that  the  “plant was  discovered  growing  in  a 
domestic garden in the Amazon rain-forest  of South America.” The patentee claimed 
that  Da  Vine  represented  a  new  and  distinct variety  of  Banisteviopsis  caapi,  primarily 
because of the flower colour. 

The  Co-ordinating  Body  of  Indigenous Organizations  of  the  Amazon  Basinz0 
learned  of  the  patent  in  1994.  On  their  behalf,  the  Center  for  International 
Environmental Law  ( C I E L ) ~ ~  
filed a re-examination request on the patent. CIEL argued 
that  a  review of the record led to the  conclusion that Da Vine  was  neither new  nor 
distinct. They argued also that the granting of the patent would be contrary to the public 
and morality aspects of the Patent Act because of the sacred nature of Bunisteviopsis caupi 
throughout  the Amazon region. In  November  1999, the  USPTO rejected  the  patent 
claim agreeing that Da Vine was not distinguishable from the prior art presented by the 
CIEL and therefore the patent should never have been issued. 

However, the USPTO reversed its rejection in January 2001 and issued a certificate 
in April allowing the patent to stand for the remaining two years of its term. The main 
reason for this was the date of filing of the patent, as it was not covered by the new rules 
in the United  States on inter partes re-examination.22 The CIEL was therefore unable to 
comment on the arguments made by the patentee that led to the patent being upheld. 
The indigenous peoples continue to protest against this patent.23 

D.  The Hoodia Cactus Case 

In the Hoodia  Cactus case,  the issue was  not whether  the patent should or should 
not have been granted, but rather whether the local people known as the San, who had 
nurtured  the  traditional  knowledge  underpinning  the  invention,  were  entitled  to 
receive a fair share of benefits arising from commercialization. 

The San  people, who  live  around  the  Kalahari Desert  in  southern Africa, have 
traditionally eaten the hooha cactus to stave off hunger and thirst on long hunting trips. 
In 1937, a Dutch anthropologist studying the San noted this use of hoodia. Scientists at 
the South African Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (S.A. cSIR)24 recently 
re-found  his Report and began studying the plant. 

20  An umbrella organization representing over 400 indigenous groups; see more on: cchttp://www.coica.orp. 
2’  See more on: c<http://www.ciel.orgn. 
The patent was granted in June 1986, and Section 102 of the Patent Act, 35 U.S.C. S 102, was amended in 

1999 and established a “statutory bar” against the grant of a patent in certain specified conditions. 

23  See, for more information: cchttp://www.amazonlink.org/biopiracy/ayahuasca.htm)). 
24  See, for more information: <<http://www.csir.co.zan. 

684 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

In  1995 the  S.A. CSIR patented hoodia’s appetite-suppressing element (P57). In 
1997 they licensed this element to the U.K.  biotech  company Phytopharm. In  1998, 
the  U.S.  pharmaceutical  company  Pfizer25  acquired the  rights  from  Phytopharm  to 
develop and market P57 as a potential slimming drug and cure for obesity.26 

On hearing  of the  possible  exploitation of their  traditional knowledge, the  San 
people  threatened legal  action against  the  S.A. CSIR on grounds of biopiracy. They 
claimed that their traditional knowledge had been  stolen, and that  the S.A. CSIR had 
failed to comply with the rules of the CBD which require the prior informed consent of 
all stakeholders, including the original discoverers and users. 

Phytopharm argued that it had conducted extensive enquiries but were unable to 
find any of the  “knowledge holders”. The remaining San were apparently at the time 
living in a tented camp 1,500 miles from their tribal lands. The S.A. CSIR claimed that 
they had  planned  to  inform the  San  of the  research  and  share  the benefits, but  first 
wanted to make sure that the drug proved successful. 

In March 2002, an understanding was reached between the S.A. C s l R  and the San 
whereby the San, recognized as the custodians of traditional knowledge associated with 
the hoodia plant, will receive a share of any future royalties. Although the San will only 
receive a very small percentage of eventual sales,27 the potential size of the market means 
that the sum involved could still be substantial. The drug is unlikely to reach the market 
before 2006, and may as yet fai1.28 

E. 

The Basmati Case 

The  Basmati  Rice  case  concerned  the  protection  of  traditional  knowledge  and 

geographical indications.29 

Basmati is a variety of rice fi-om the Punjab provinces of India and Pakistan.30 The 
rice is a slender, aromatic long-grain variety that originated in this region and is a major 
export crop for both countries. 

The problem arose when the USPTO issued, in 1997, patents for three new strains 
of rice. These strains could be sold under the name “Basmati”, referring to a particular 
form of rice-long-grained,  aromatic, and associated with the plains of Punjab. In 1998, 

25  See, for more information: cchttp://www.pfizer.com/main.html)). 
26  A market worth more than L6 billion sterling. 
27  The S.A. CSIR agreed to pay the San 8  percent of payments made by its licensee, Phytopharm, during the 
drug’s clinical development  over the first three years. Later, when the drug is marketed  (sometime between 2006 
and 2008) the San will receive 6 percent of all royalties. 

28  See more on: cchttp://www.scienceinafrica.co.za/2003/may/san.h~~~. 
29  S. Lall, India  and  Pakistan: Geographical  Indications--The  Basmati  Issue,  paper delivered at  the  International 
Trademark Association Annual  Meeting, Seattle, May  1999; Professor John  Barton,  Geographical  Indications:  the 
Basmati Case, in Integrating Intellectual Property Rights and Development Policy, London, September 2002, p. 89; 
and Gopalakrishnan, supra, footnote 2. 
3”  Trade Mark Ordinance of 2001, available at: cchttp://www.ficpi.orgn, “Pakistan”, “Trade Mark Ordinance”. 

PROTECTING TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE 

685 

the U.S. k c e  Federation submitted that the term  “Basmati” was  generic and referred 
to  a  specific  type  of  aromatic  rice.  In  response,  U.S.  and  Indian  civil  society 
organizations collectively filed  a  petition  seeking to  prevent  U.S.-grown  rice  from 
being advertised with the word  “Basmati”. The U.S. Department  of Agriculture and 
the  U.S.  Federal  Trade  Commission  rejected  the  petition  in  May  2001.  Neither 
considered that the labelling of rice as “American-grown Basmati” was misleading, and 
deemed “Basmati” to be a generic term. After the protest of India and Pakistan against 
the  use the name  “Basmati”, the USPTO disallowed the patent holder from using the 
name  “Basmati”, as  that name was  not  considered to be  a generic name but  denoted 
specific qualities of the famous Basmati Rice from the Punjab provinces of India and 
Pakistan. 

The rice can now be sold only as “Texniati” or any other name that clearly informs 

the consumer that the rice is not fiom the Punjab region. 

VI.  THE APPLICATION OF EXISTING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS TO 

TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE 
Traditional Knowledge and Intellectual Property Rights in International Law 

A. 

With  indigenous groups and peoples’ organizations stressing the  need  for more 
focused attention  on traditional knowledge, a  “Madrid Workshop”,  organized under 
the auspices of the CBD, endorsed the need for a working group on Article 8(j).31 Under 
the  CBD, the  Working  Group-known 
as  the  Access  to  Genetic  Resources  and 
Benefit-Sharing  Group-has 
developed the Bonn  Guidelines on Access  and Benefit- 
Sharing. These Bonn Guidelines were adopted at the CBD Sixth Conference of Parties 
in 2002.32 

The Bonn Guidelines provide for  a  set  of voluntary  rules that wdl  facilitate the 
drafting and further development of national biodiversity legislation or administrative 
regulation. The main objectives of the Guidelines are to contribute to the sustainable 
use  of genetic resources and to provide a transparent framework to facilitate access and 
ensure benefit-sharing at national or regional levels. For biodiversity-rich countries, the 
importance of these Guidelines is that they advance the harmonisation of the steps for 
adequate access and benefit-sharing. The Guidelines also clarifj. and complement many 
of the existing obligations under the CBD. 

The protection  of traditional knowledge is  also  being discussed  by  a number  of 
international bodies,  including  the  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization,33 the 

3’  Report on the Workshop  on Traditional Knowledge and Biodwersity, Madrid, 24-28  November 1997, 

UNEP/CBD/TKBD/I/~, dated 15 December 1997. 

32  7-19 April 2002, The Hague, avdable at: cchttp://www.biodiv.orp),  “Documents”, “Meetings”. 
33  See more on the official Website (chttp://www.wipo.org,,. 

686 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

World Health  Organization  WHO),^^  the  United  Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development  (UNCTAD) ,35  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United 
Nations36 and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organi~ation.~~ 

The  FAO International  Treaty  and  the  Bonn  Guidelines  are  important  new 
developments of the protection of traditional knowledge. In addition, the Doha WTO 
Ministerial Declaration highlighted the need for further work in the TRIPS Council on 
protecting traditional knowledge.38 

B.  Protection of  Traditional Knowledge  Under Existing Modes oflntellectual Property Rights 

Practically all types of intellectual property could, to some extent, be used for the 
protection of traditional knowledge.39  However, the absence of developed intellectual 
property regulatory systems and the courts (both for applicants and for governments) in 
developing countries should not be underestimated. Also, existing intellectual property 
systems are, to a large extent, based on individual intellectual achievements. 

Copyright  can  be  used  to  protect  the  artistic  manifestations  of  traditional 
knowledge  holders,  especially  artists  who  belong  to 
indigenous  and  native 
communities, against  unauthorized  reproduction  and  exploitation.  It  could  include 
works such as: 

- 

literary works, i.e. tales, legends and myths, trahtions, poems; 

-  theatrical works; 
-  pictorial works; 
- 

textile works, i.e. fabrics, garments, textile compositions, tapestries, carpets; 

-  musical works; and 
- 

three-dimensional  works,  i.e.  pottery  and  ceramics, sculptures, wood  and 
stone carvings, and artifacts of various kinds. 

Related  rights  to  copyright,  such  as  performing  rights,  could  be  used  for  the 
protection of the performances of singers and dancers and presentations of stage plays, 
puppet shows and other comparable performances. 

New plant products, cultivars and varieties of all species of plants may be protected 
under plant breeders’ rights. To be protected, a variety has to be different from known 

34  See the official Website (<http://www.who.int)), 
35  See more on: ((http://www.unctad.org)). 
36  See more on: c(http://www.fao.orgn. 
37  See the official Website ((http://www.unesco.or~). 
J*  Paragraph  19 of Doha  WTO Ministerial Declaration,  WT/MIN(O~)/DEC/~, 
39  See, for more information, Dutfield, supra, footnote 1; M. Blakeney, Protection of  Traditional Knowledge under 

2001, called for the TRIPS Council to examine the issue ofprotection of traditional knowledge and folklore. 

adopted  on  14 November 

Ipitellectrral Property Law, 2000, European Intellectual Property Review, pp. 251-261. 

PROTECTING  TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE 

687 

varieties and uniform and stable in  its essential characteristics, even after a number of 
reproduction  cycles. Varieties developed by  the  possessors  of  traditional  knowledge 
could also be legally protected in this way. Improvements to varieties representing the 
natural state of plant diversity could also constitute new varieties eligible for protection. 
The design and shape of utilitarian  craft  products such  as  furniture, receptacles, 
garments and  articles of ceramics, leather, wood  and  other materials may  qualify for 
protection as industrial designs, 

All  goods  manufactured  and  services  offered  by  manufacturers,  craftsmen, 
professionals and traders in native  and indigenous communities, or by  the bodies that 
represent them or in which they are grouped, may  be  differentiated from each other 
with trademarks and service marks. 

The protection of undisclosed information is  achieved by  the repression of unfair 
competition.  The provisions against  unfair  competition may  also be  used  to  protect 
undisclosed  tramtional knowledge, for instance traditional secrets kept by  native and 
indigenous  communities  that  may  be  of  technological  and  economic  value. 
Acknowledging  that  secret  knowledge  may  be  protected  by  means  of  unfair- 
competition law will make it possible for access to that knowledge, its exploitation and 
its communication to third parties to be monitored. Control over the knowledge, and 
regulation of the manner in which it may be acquired, used and passed  on, will in turn 
make it possible  to  arrange contracts for the licensing of secret traditional knowledge 
and deriving profits from its commercial exploitation. 

C.  Examples of Protection  of  Traditional Knowledge  in National Laws 

The  WIPO Review of Existing  Intellectual  Protection  of Traditional Knowledge  studied 
how countries use  intellectual property tools for promoting and protecting tramtional 
knowledge and folklore.40 Australia, Canada, Colombia, Kazakhstan, New Zealand, the 
Russian Federation, Venezuela and Viet Nam provided actual examples of how existing 
intellectual property mechanisms have already been used in order to protect traditional 
knowledge.41 

Australia  identified several cases which demonstrated the ability of the Australian 
intellectual property regime to protect  traditional knowledge;42 for example, Foster  v. 
Mountford,43  a  case  which  involved  the  importation  of  carpets  manufactured  in 
Viet Nam, which  reproduced  (without permission) either all or parts  of well-known 

Third  Session  of  Intergovernmental  Comnlittee  on  Intellectual  Property  and  Genetic  Resources, 
Traditional  Knowledge  and  Folklore,  WIW  Review  of  Existing  Intellectual  Protection  of  Traditional  Knowledge, 
WIPO/GRTKF/IC/3/7,  Geneva, 13 June 2002, based on the responses of the countries to the WIPO Questionnaire. 
4'  See also UNCTAD, Systems and National Experience for Protecting Traditional Knowledge,  Innovations  and Practices, 

TD/B/co~.l/EM.l3/2, October 2000. 

42  See  generallv.  M.  Blakenev.  Intellectual  Proaertv.  Bioloaical  Divenitv  and  Aericulttrral  Research  in  Australia. 

53 Australia:  J o u d  of Agriculturd  Research, 2005, ip. 127-0148, 

Y 

43  (1976) 29 FLR 233. 

688 

THE JOURNAL OF W O U D  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

works  created  by  Aboriginal  artists.  The  Australian  artists  successfully  claimed 
infringement  of copyright  as well as  unfair trade  practices-the 
labels attached  to the 
carpets claimed that the carpets had been designed by Aboriginal artists and that royalties 
were paid to the artists on every carpet sold. In awarding damages to the plaintiffs, the 
judgment  recognized  the  concepts  of  “cultural  harm”  and  “aggregated  damages”. 
v.  Indofurn Pty Ltd.,44 Bulun Bulun  if3 Milpurrurru  v. R. G. T. 
Similar cases-Milpuirurru 
Textiles Pty Ltd.45 and Bulun Bulun v. Flash Screenp~inters4~-concerned the importation 
and  sale  in  Australia  of printed  clothing  fabric which  infringed  the  copyright  of the 
Aboriginal artist, Mr John  Bulun Bulun.  These  cases led to the creation  of a  national 
certification  trademark  for Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander artists in  Australia.47 
Like any other trademark, this certification mark or Label of Authenticity is intended to 
help  promote  the  marketing  of  the  art  and  cultural  products  and  deter  the  sale  of 
products falsely claiming to be of Aboriginal  0rigin.48 

In Canada, copyright protection under the Copyright A ~ t 4 ~  

has been widely used 
by indigenous artists, composers and writers  of tradition-based  creations such as wood 
carvings of Pacific coast artists, including masks and totem poles, the silver jewellery of 
Haida  artists, songs  and  sound  recordings  of Aborignal  artists  and  Inuit  sculptures. 
Trademarks, including certification  marks, are used by indigenous peoples to identify a 
wide  spectre  of goods  and  services, ranging from traditional  art and  artwork  to food 
products,  clothing,  tourist  services  and  enterprises  run  by  First  Nati0ns.5~ Many 
indigenous  businesses  and  organizations  have  registered  trademarks  relating  to 
traditional  symbols  and  names.  In  contrast,  industrial  designs  protection  under  the 
Industrial Design Act has not been widely used by indigenous persons or comm~nities.~~ 

In  Colombia,  a  specific  provision  of  law52  prohibits  registration  of  the  signs 
consisting of names of indigenous and Afro-American  communities which constitute an 
expression of their  culture,  without  the  explicit  authorization  of the Communities in 
question  or the request  by  the communities  themselves. For example,  the registration 
of the trademark “Tairona” has been rejected in Columbia on the grounds that “Tairona” 
is the name of an indigenous community that inhabited pre-Hispanic  Colombia. 

44  (1995) 30 1PR 209. 
45  (1998) 41 IPR  513. 
46  See also discussion in (1989) EIPR Vol. 2, pp.  346355. 
47  See a paper prepared by the Aboriginal and Torres Straight Islander Commission in May 1999, GATT TRIPS 

Reviav--Aboriginal  and  Tones  Straight  blander  People’s  Issues, available  at:  cchttp://www.atsic.gov.au~),  “Issues”, 
“Indigenous Rights”, “Intellectual Property”, “GATT TRIPS Review”. 

4*  See more about the Austrahan trademarks regime on: ((http://www.ipaustralia.gov.au,), “Trademarks”. 
49  The Copyright Act of Canada came into force in 1924. A major revision to the Act was passed in 1988 and 

another in 1997. Find the text of the Copyright Act on: cchttp://laws.justice.gc.ca)), “Copyright Act”. 

5”  Trademarks  Act  of  1985,  Chapter  T-13,  avadable  at:  ((http://lois.justice.gc.can, “Dcpartment  of Justice 
Canada”, “Consolidated Statutes and  Regulations”. As  a  consequence of the WTO TRIPS Agreement, Canada ha? 
cnacted amendments to  its Trademarks Act, which  entered into  force on  1 January  1996. See  also Ph.  l3. Kerr, 
Trademark Law in Canada: An Overvino, and the Trademark Act of 1996 on cchttp://www.trademark-law-canada.com)). 
5’  The  Industrial  Design  Act  of  Canada  of  1985,  amended  in  1996; S 10  of  the  W I p o  Review,  supra, 
52  Decision 486 of the Andean Community, Article 136(g). 

footnote 40. 

PROTECTING  TRADITIONAL  KNOWLEDGE 

689 

In  New  Zealand  the  Trade  Marks  Act  contains  provisions  that  prevent  the 
registration of trademarks where their use  or registration would be likely to  offend a 
significant section of the community, including the Maori.53 

Both Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation have identified examples of protection 
of  technical  traditional knowledge  through  the  grant  of  patents.  In  Kazakhstan, the 
external  appearance of  national outer  clothes,  head  dresses  (saykele), carpets  (tuskiiz), 
decorations of saddles, national dwellings (yurta) and their structural elements, as well as 
women’s apparel accessories, like bracelets (blezik), national children’s cots-crib-cradles 
and  tableware  (piah,  torcyk)  are  protected  as  industrial  designs.  The  designations 
containing clements of Kazakh ornament are registered and protected as trademarks,s4 

Viet Nam has mentioned a patent for a traditional preparation of medicinal plants 
used to help stopping drug-addiction, and a trademark registered for a traditional balm 
made of medicinal plants (Trtrong Son) .55 

VII. TRADITIONAL 

KNOWLEDGE AND  GEOGRAPHICAL 

INDICATIONS 

At  first sight, the use  of geographical indcations for the protection  of traditional 
knowledge seems  particularly suitable. Geographical indications are  not  intended  to 
reward innovation, but rather to reward the goodwill and reputation created or built up 
by  a  group of producers over many years  or even centuries. Geographical inhcations 
can create economic rewards for producers who use  traditional methods in the region 
where the product has been traditionally produced. 

Geographical indications may be used to enhance the commercial value of natural, 
traditional  and  craft  products  of  all  kinds  if  their  particular  characteristics  may  be 
attributed to their geographical origin. A number of products that come from various 
regions are the result  of traditional processes  and knowledge implemented by  one or 
more communities in a given region. The special characteristics of those products are 
appreciated by  the public, and may be symbolized by  the indication of source used to 
identifjr the  products.  Better  exploitation and promotion  of geographical indications 
would  make it possible to  afford better protection  for the  economic interests of thc 
communities with traditional knowledge. 

For  example,  Venezuela  and  Viet  Nam  protect  tradltional  knowledge  through 
geographical indications. Coccry the Pecuya, a liquor made &om the agave in Venezuela and 

53  New Zealand has  noted that  “Maori”  is  used  to  refer to  the indigenous people  of New Zealand.  New 
Zealand Trade Marks Act 1953, as amended by the Trade Marks Amendment Act of 1994 and 2002. The 2002 Act 
required  the  Commissioner  to  establish  an  Advisory  Committee  to  provide  advice  on  the  registrability of 
trademarks which contain Maori signs, such as text or imagery. This took into account the new offensiveness test 
at Section  17(l)(b): an  absolute ground for refusing registration of a trade mark that would be likely to offend a 
significant section of the community including Maori. See also T. Jackson and B.S. Waters, Intellectual Property in 
New Zealand, William Collins Publ. Ltd., Auckland, 2002. 

54  § 12 of the  Wrpo Review, supra, footnote 40. 
55  Response of Viet Nam on the WIFO Questionnaire, in  WIPO Review, id. 

690 

THE  

Pku  Quoc,  fish soya sauce, and Shun  Tuyet MOC Chau, a variety of tea, in Vict Nam are 
protected as geographical indications.56 

However, the protection of geographical indications is aimed at protecting the names 
of goods and not knowledge as such. Geographical indlcations could play a complementary 
role in protecting tradltional knowledge, but it seems to be not possible to protect all forms 
of traditional knowledge just by using this one form of intellectual property alone. 

VIII.  SUI  GENENS PROTECTION O F  TRADITIONAL 
A.  The Reasons f o v  Spec@  Protections of Traditional Knowledge 

KNOWLEDGE 

The nature of traditional knowledge is such that it is transmitted  orally rather than 
written down. It also comprises several components:  specific names, recipes, processes 
and technologies,  plant varieties, medicines  and artistic designs. Due to this specificity 
and  complex  nature,  and  in  spite of all the  efforts of the  last  two  decades, final  and 
universally  acceptable  solutions  for  the  protection  and  promotion  of  traditional 
knowledge have not yet been developed. 

Some intellectual  property  rights,  such  as  copyright  and patent,  are legal rights 
created as mechanisms  to encourage innovation-the 
creation and disclosure of new 
knowledge or new expressions often used for the protection of traditional knowledge. 
However,  these  rights  are  granted  to  a  defined  individual  or  group  of individuals 
identified  as  the inventor or creator, although  they can be transferred  to another by 
sale or gift. Traditional knowledge and practices,  in contrast, are often handed down 
from generation to generation, and have no clearly identifiable individual or original 
inventor.  Moreover,  it  has been  widely  stated  that  these  intellectual  property  rights 
are not suitable for traditional knowledge  because  they protect new knowledge  that 
is  created  by  individuals  and  do not  recognize  collective  knowledge  built  up  over 
time. 

The other intellectual property rights, such as trademarks and geographical indlcations, 
other words,  imitation  is  allowed as  long as  the  product  has  a 
therefore does not offer a perfect solution for protecting traditional 

concern  only names-in 
dlfferent name-and 
knowlcdgc either. 

B.  Examples of Protection of Traditional Knowledge Under a  Sui Generis System 

Several  countries57 have  already  decided  that  the  existing  intellectual  property 
system is not, on its own, adequate for the protection of traditional  knowledge.  These 

13 of the  Wrpo Review, id. 

56 
57  Brazil, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Panama, the Philippines, Samoa and Venezuela have sui genetis systems of 
protection of traditional  knowledge.  Ecuador, New  Zealand,  Papua  New  Guinea, Peru,  the  Solomon Islands, 
Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago and Viet Nam are in the process of enacting srri genetis rysternc: see  Wwo 
Review, supra, footnote 40. 

PROTECTING TRADITIONAL KNOWLE1)GE 

69 1 

countries have enacted or are in the process of enacting sui generis systems of protection 
to accommodate the special characteristics of traditional knowledge or folklore.58 

Brazil  was  among  the  first  countries  to  establish  a  sui  generis  system  for  the 
protection of traditional knowledge associated to biodiversity by a special law known as 
the  Provisional  Measure  of  2OOl.S9  Protection  is  mainly  obtained  by  a  bilateral 
approach, that is,  through  contracts of access,  the purpose  of which is  to  ensure the 
sharing of benefits arising from the use  of genetic resources and associated  traditional 
knowledge.  Article  9  of  the  Provisional  Measure,  however,  seems  to  establish  a 
proprietary regime of traditional knowledge rights, because it recognizes the indigenous 
and  local  communities'  right  to  prevent  unauthorized  third  parties  from  using, 
exploiting,  experimenting,  disclosing,  transmitting  and  re-transmitting  data  and 
information that integrate or constitute associated traditional knowledge. 

The Brazilian Law has also provisions on benefit-sharing, including compensation, 
access to and transfer of technology, licensing and capacity building. There is  no pre- 
determined term of protection. The grant of industrial property rights in processes  or 
products obtained from national genetic resources depends upon compliance with the 
Provisional Measure. That  means that  industrial property registration applicants must 
provide information on the  origins of genetic resources and  of associated  traditional 
knowledge, whenever applicable. The Brazilian Law provides for sanctions including 
fines,  the  seizure  of  illegal  material  and  products  embodying  unlawful  material, 
prohibition of distribution, invalidation of patents or registrations, loss of governmental 
incentives, etc. 

The Law  on Biodiversity of  Costa  Rica  does not  establish  a  specific sui  generis 
system of protection but establishes certain general criteria concerning community rights 
in  traditional knowledge  and  calls  for  local  and  indgenous  communities,  through  a 
participatory process,  to  establish the  mechanism for the protection and  registration of 
biodwersity-associated traditional knowledge.60 To date, it is perhaps the most ambitious 
and  elaborate  national  law  implementing the  CBD. The  Law's  overall objective is  to 
conserve biodiversity, sustainably uthze resources and distribute fairly the derived benefits 
and costs. 

The  Cultural  Heritage  Protection  National  Law  of  Guatemala6'  provides  for 
protection  of  traditional  knowledge  from  a  national  cultural  heritage  approach.  This 
means that expressions of national culture, which comprise all intangible expressions of 
cultural  heritage  includq traditions, medicinal  knowledge,  music,  performances and 

58  Suigeneris systems of protection are already provided in areas such as the protection ofplant varieties (UPOV 

system) and protection of databases (EC Directive 96/9/EC,  11 March 1996). See also G.S. Nijar, Sui Generis Law 
f . r  Plant  Varieties: Preserving the Knowledge and Creativity .f Traditional Breeders, Third World Network, Penang, 1999. 
59  The Provisional Measure 2.186-16, of 23 August 2001. 
6"  The Ley de  Biodiuersidad,  or Biodiversity Law, was adopted by  the Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica in 

April 1998. 

61  The Cultural Heritage Protection National Law No. 2697, as amended in 1998. 

692 

THE  

culinary traditions included in the Culture  Goods Registry, are under  the protection of 
the State and thus cannot be disposed of by means of contractual arrangements. That is, 
they cannot be sold and there is no right for remuneration. The system, which is managed 
by the Ministry of Cultural Affairs, seems to follow a public good approach in the sense 
that traditional knowledge is to be identified, recorded and preserved by the State for the 
benefit of the entire society. 

The sui generis system of Panama constitutes probably the first comprehensive system 
of protection of tradtional knowledge adopted. The regime, established by special law in 
2000,62  covers  the  creations  of indigenous  peoples,  such  as  inventions,  designs  and 
innovations,  cultural  historical  elements,  music,  art  and  traditional artistic  expressions. 
Two  additional  criteria  are  designated  to  identify  the  subject-matter  of  protection: 
traditional knowledge is protected to the extent it provides for the cultural identification 
of indigenous peoples and is susceptible to commercial use;  collective exclusive rights 
are accorded to registered elements of traditional knowledge. The authority to attribute 
rights  is  vested  upon  the  Congress  or  the  Traditional  Indigcnous  Authority.  Some 
elements  of  knowledge  may  be  co-owned  by  various  communities,  in  which  case 
benefits will be jointly shared. The Law also provides for exceptions to rights conferred 
as well as measures of enforcement. Collective indigenous rights may also be a basis for 
opposing  unauthorized  third-party  claims  of  intellectual  property  rights,  such  as 
copyright,  trademarks,  geographical  indications  and  others.  The  Executive  Decree 
No. 12 of2001 made clear that the regime also covers biodwersity-associated tradtional 
knowledge,  thus  giving  a  practical  expression,  as  far  as  the  territory  of  Panama  is 
concerned, to the provisions of Article S(j) of the cBD.63 

The Philippines has  enacted the Indigenous Peoples’ Rights Act of 1997,64 which 
protects indigenous communities’ rights in general, including their rights in traditional 
knowledge  and  the  rights  to  limit  the  access  of  researchers  into  their  ancestral 
domains/lands  or  territories.  It  regulates  the  rights  to  be  designated  as  sources  of 
information in whatever writings and publications resulting from research, and the right 
to receive royalties from the income derived from any of the researches conducted and 
resulting publications. The enforcement of those rights follows procedures established by 
customary laws of indigenous peoples. 

Samoa has the Village Fono Act 1990 which provides for an institutional structure 
within the village communities  “Village Fono”  (Village Council) and which, although 
indirectly, effectively protects  Samoa’s trahtional form of governance.65 

62  Law  No.  20, Special Intellectual Property  Regime  on Collective  Rights ofIndigenous  Peoples for  the 
Protcction  and Defense of their Cultural Identity as their Traditional Knowledge, of 26 June 2000; and Executive 
Decree No. 12 of20 March 2001. 

63  Id. 
64  Republican Act No. 8371; see also WIPo/IrTK/RT/99/6A,  27  October 1999, round table on Intellectual 
Property  and  Traditional  Knowledge,  The  Experience  .f  the  Philippines,  available  at:  <<http//www. 
wipo,org/cng/rneetings/l999>>. 

65  § 21 of the  WIPO Review, supra, footnote 40. 

PROTECTING  TRADITIONAL  KNOWLEDGE 

693 

Peru  adopted  new  legislation  on  the  Protection  Regime  for  the  Collective 
Knowledge  of  Indigenous  Peoples  in  2002  which  recognized  that  the  traditional 
knowledge of the indigenous peoples helps to conserve and make sustainable use  of the 
components  of  biodversity.66 The  new  Law  established  a  sui  generis  system  to  give 
adequate protection to those possessing traditional knowledge. The Regime recognized 
the indigenous peoples’ ownership and associated rights over their trahtional knowledge, 
as well as their right to decide on how it should be used. A voluntary Register is set up 
within  the  National  Institute for  the  Defense  of  Competition  and  the  Protection  of 
Intellectual Property.67  The  Law  also  stated  that  indgenous  peoples  may  enter  into 
“knowledge licensing contracts” which specie the terms for the use of their knowledge. 
One requirement for access to knowledge that is not within the public domain is prior 
informed consent by the people possessing the knowledge. 

An innovative and extremely important feature of the Regime is the creation of a 
Fund for the Development of Indigenous Peoples, which will receive 0.5 percent of the 
sales  resulting from  the  marketing of products developed  on  the  basis  of traditional 
knowledge. Article 7 of the Law states that: 

“. . . pursuant to this Decision and supplementary domestic legislation, the member countries 
recognise  and  uphold  the  rights  and  decision-making  authority  of  indigenous,  Afro- 
American  and  local  communities,  over  their  knowledge,  innovations  and  traditional 
practices associated with genetic resources and their derivatives.” 
Thailand has developed a comprehensive suigeneris regime for traditional medicine. 
The  Thai  Traditional Thai  Medicinal  Intelligence  Act  distinguishes  three  different 
categories of “Traditional Formulas”: National Formula, Private Formula and General 
Formula. Under the National Formula, the Ministry of Public Health has authority to 
announce a certain formula of tradtional Thai medicine as a national formula; the rights 
of such formula belong to the State. Private Formula can be fieely used by the owner and 
third parties must obtain permission from the owner to use the formula. General Formula 
applies  to  well-known  traditional formulas whch would  remain  fi-ee for  use  by  any 
citizen. 

There are no common themes or terms in the emerging of the sui generis  system for 
the protection of tradtional  knowledge. The establishment of a sui generis regime poses 
many complex conceptual and practical issues: 

definition of the subject-matter of protection; 

- 
-  requirements for protection; 
- 
-  title-holders; 

extent of rights to be conferred; 

G6  The Congress of Peru approved Law 2781 1 on 10 August 2002. See also Peru’s Submission to the WTO 
Committee on Trade and Environment:  Peru’s Experience ofthe Protection of Traditional Knowledge and Access to Genpric 
Resources, wT/cT~/W/176, dated 27 October 2000. 
67  The  National  Institute  for  the  Defense  of  Competition  and  the  Protection  of  Intellectual  Property 

(INDECOPI); see, for more information: ((http://www.indecopi.gob.peo. 

694 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

modes of acquisition, including registration; 

- 
-  duration of protection; 
-  enforcement measures. 
It  is  also  not  clear  whether  the  search  for  a  regime  of  protection  of  traltional 
knowledge should aim at a single regime covering all types of traltional knowledge, or 
for a set of different, specific regimes adapted to the nature of the subject-matter  to be 
protected.  As  it  seems  rather  difficult  to  define  common  rules,  the  second  approach 
appears  more  appropriate  at  present.  However,  the  subject-matters  for  the  specific 
regimes and what complex issues might arise are still not clear. 

Any  suigeneris regime should define the nature of the rights conferred. In most cases, 
intellectual property regimes grant exclusive rights which enables preventing third parties 
from exploiting the protected subject-matter.  Some types of intellectual property rights, 
however, do not entail exclusivity. For instance, the TRIPS Agreement does not require 
the granting of exclusive rights over unlsclosed information.6* 

It should be noted that the granting of exclusive rights may limit rather than promote 
the use of traditional knowledge. I t  may also be in contradiction to the practices and values 
of  traditional  and  indigenous communities. An  alternative  could  be  suggested  which 
would provide for a right to remuneration not associated to the exercise of an exclusive 
right. However, this alternative may  also  contradict, in many cases,  the practices and 
values of traditional and indigenous communities. 

Ix.  TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND THE WTO 

The protection of traditional knowledge is currently being discussed in the WTO 
TRIPS Council and was  explicitly listed for examination by that  Council in the Doha 
Ministerial De~laration.6~ Paragraph  19 of the  Doha  Declaration instructs the  TRIPS 
Council to  continue  the  review  of Article 27.3(b) of the  TRIPS Agreement, and  to 
examine the relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the CBD and the protection 
of traditional knowledge and folklore as well as other relevant new developments.7” 

At present the TRIPS Agreement is silent on the issue of traltional knowledge, as 
TRIPS mainly  regulates the  trade  aspects  of  existing intellectual  property  rights under 
established procedures. 

68  Article 39. 
hY  See more on: ((http://rn.wto.orgn, “Doha Ministerial”. 
7”  Doha Ministerial Declaration adopted on 14 November 2001, paragraph 19: “We instruct the Council for 
TKIPS, in  pursuing  its  work  programme  including  under  the  review  of  Article  27.3(b),  the  review  of  the 
implementation ofthe TRIPS Agreement under Article 71.1 and the work foreseen pursuant to paragraph 12 ofthis 
Declaration,  to  examine,  inter  alia,  the  relationship  between  the  TRIPS Agreement  and  the  Convention  on 
Biological Diversity, the protection of traditional knowledge and folklore, and other relevant new developments 
raised by Members pursuant to Article 71.1. In understanding this work, the TRIPS Council shall be guided by the 
objectives and principles set out in Articles 7 and 8 of the TRIPS Agreement  and shall take fully into account the 
development dimension.” 

PROTECTING TRADITIONAL  KNOWLEDGE 

695 

Article  27.3@) of  the  TRIPS Agreement  allows  Member  States  to  exclude  from 
patentability plants and animals, but not micro-organisms. This provision has given rise to 
considerable codision, as Member States have  some  flexibility in interpretation and in 
establishing their relevant laws.71 

Many  developing countries, such  as  India,72  Brazil73  and  the  African  Group,74 
would like the TRIPS Agreement, and in particular Article 27.3(b) which concerns the 
patentability of life forms, broadened to include issues such as disclosure requirements, 
benefit-sharing  arrangements and  prior  informed  consent. Most  developed countries, 
however,  oppose  such a broadening of scope, arguing that  these issues  should not  be 
discussed at the WTO but in other relevant fora such as the WIPO. 

The  relationship  between  the  TRIPS Agreement  and  the  CBD, including  the 
protection of trahtional knowledge, has been addressed by the Secretariat of the WTO and 
examined by its Committee on Trade and Environment (cTE).7s The CTE considered the 
provisions of the TRIPS Agreement relevant to its work on the environment. However, 
the CBD Secretariat has not yet been given permanent observer status to the Council for 
TRIPS. The  number  of  admitted  observers  is  very  limited  and  non-governmental 
organizations are not allowed to participate. 

Some  developing  countries  have  argued  that  the  TRIPS Agreement  must  be 
reviewed in  light  of the  obligations on States under  Article  S(i)  of the  cBD.76  The 
African Group has been particularly active in relation to the review of Article 27.3(b). 
It wants that provision to be harmonised with the CBD, the objective of which is  “to 
protect the rights of indigenous people and local farming communities and to protect 
and promote biological diversity.”77 The proposal of the African Group demanded that 
such harmonisation also be made with the FAO International Undertaking which “seeks 
to protect and promote Farmers’ Rights and to conserve plant genetic resources.”7* 

India noted in its submission that while the TRIPS Agreement obliges Members to 
for  non-biological  and 

for  micro-organisms  and 

provide  product  patents 

7’  This leads to two questions: (a) does the exclusion for plants and animals apply only to naturally occurring 
plants and animals, or can Members exercise the option of exclusion to cover plants and animals that have been 
genetically modified or that contain parts (including micro-organisms) that have been genetically modified? (b) does 
the mandatory requirement to patent micro-organisms apply only to genetically modified micro-organisms or does 
it apply also to naturally occurring micro-organisms? 

Traditional Knowledgethe Indian Experience, W T / C T E / W / ~ ~ ~ ,  

72  See India’s Submission to the WTO Committee on Trade and Environment, Protection of  Biodiversity  and 
73  Communication  from  Brazil  to  the  WTO  TRIPS Council,  Review  of Article  27.3(b), IP/C/W/228,  24 
74  Communication from Mauritius on behalf of the African Group to the WTO TRIPS Council, Review oftbe 

IP/C/W/198,  14 July 2000. 

Provisions ofArticle 27.3(b), IP/C/W/206,  20 September 2000. 
75  See Environment and  TRIPS, W T / C T E / W / ~  and W/8/Corr.1;  The CBD and  TRIPS, WT/CTE/W/50;  and 
The Relationship Between the  CBD and  TRIPS with a Focus on Article 27.3@), WT/CTE/W/125.  The CTE was formally 
established  in  1995 by  the  WTO General  Council to examine  the  relationship between the provisions of the 
multilateral trading system and trade measures for environmental purposes, including those pursuant to multilateral 
environmental agreements. 

November 2000. 

76  See Submission by India to the WTO, supra, footnote 72. 
77  CBD, Preamble, available at: cchttp://www.biodiv.orgil. 
78  Supra, footnote 74. 

696 

THE JOURNAL  O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

microbiological processes, and to provide for the protection of plant varieties, the CBD 
reaffirms  that Nation  States have sovereign rights over their own biological resources, 
recognizes the desirability of sharing equitably the benefits arising from the use of these 
resources as well as traditional knowledge, and acknowledges that special provisions are 
required  to  meet  the  needs  of  developing  countries.79  In  order  to  reconcile  any 
contradictions,  India  argues  that  the  innovators  share  with  holders  of  traditional 
knowledge  the  benefits  arising  from  exploitation  through  transfer  of  information 
agreements.80 

Brazil noted in its submission to the CTE the conceptual and operational difficulties 
in bringing traditional knowledge under the TRIPS Agreement.81 Venezuela disagreed 
and stated that binding international rules on the protection  of traditional knowledge 
should be developed in the framework of T R I P S . ~ ~  

Developed countries have not contested the possibility, and the right, of countries 
to protect traditional knowledge. Thus, the United States has  argued that there is  no 
inconsistency between  the  CBD and  the  TRIPS Agreement  and  has  encouraged  the 
development  of  databases  on  traditional  knowledge.83 In  a  second  Communication 
from the United States, it was pointed out that national or local legislation or regulation 
could be adopted to establish  the basis  for contractual arrangements between suppliers 
and recipients of traditional k n o ~ l e d g e . ~ ~  However, the United  States does not favour 
any specific  provisions  on  the  protection  of  traditional  knowledge,  at  least  in  the 
framework of the TRIPS Agreement. 

The EC and its Member States support the development of an international model 
for the legal protection of tradltional knowledge. Initially, the EC expressed the view 
that the issue should be first taken up by the WIPO Committee in co-operation with the 
CBD, and only when  a model of protection is  defined and is in place should attention 
be focused on how and to what extent the protection of traditional knowledge can be 
included in the TRIPS Agreement.x5 In its latest Communication to the TRIPS Council86 
the EC stated that, while recognizing that traditional knowledge can  be  protected at 
national  level,  the  EC  supports  the  development  of  an  international  model  of 
protection.  The  EC  argued  that,  although  it  might  be  possible  to  protect  some 
traditional  knowledge-or 
at  least  innovations  and  goods  related  to  traditional 
knowledge-through  existing forms of intellectual property rights, it would be better 
to develop an international suigeneris model for such protection. In its Communication, 

79  See supra, footnote 77. 
8O  Supra, footnote 72. 
8'  Supra, footnote 73. 
82 WT/GC/W282,  Communication &om Venezuela, 6 August 1999. 
83  IP/C/W/209,  Communication from the United States, 3 October 2000. 
84  IP/C/W/257,  Communication from the United States, 13 June 2001. 
85  IP/C/W/254,  Communication from the EC, 13 June 2001. 
86  Communication  from  the  European  Communities  and  their  Member  States  to  the  TRIPS Council, 

IP/C/W/383,  17 October 2002. 

PROTECTING  TRADITIONAL  KNOWLEDGE 

697 

the EC suggested that  a broader scope of protection  of traditional knowledge would 
improve confidence in the international intellectual property system and would allow 
more  people,  particularly  &om  developing  countries,  to  benefit  from  the  global 
intellectual property system.87 

Developing  countries’  positions  aim  at  some  recognition  and  protection  of 
traditional knowledge, but considerable hesitation seems to exist about how to deal with 
the subject, the nature and scope of protection, and the extent to which the issue should 
be brought under the TRIPS Agreement. Some countries seem to be more concerned 
with  avoiding  the  misappropriation  of  traditional  knowledge  and  with 
the 
implementation of the sharing of benefits principle, than with the development of an 
intellectual property  rights regime  for traditional knowledge. Others  seem to aim at 
preserving the room existing at the national level to legislate on the matter, while at least 
one country has so far proposed developing mandatory provisions in the context of the 
TRIPS Agreement. It is clear that significant preparatory work is still needed. 

X.  CONCLUSION 

The protection  of tradtional knowledge raises a whole series of questions which 
can  be  considered  common  to  the  protection  of  established  forms  of  intellectual 
property and some which  are not  so common, and will need separate consideration. 
However,  some  broad  themes  for  the  ongoing  debate  on  the  establishment  of  a 
functioning system for the protection of tradtional knowledge can be sketched out. 

The traditional justification for the protection  of traditional forms of intellectual 
property  is  to stimulate innovation  and reward the  intellectual property holder for  a 
limited period of time before the benefits of the innovation are to be made available to 
society in  general. Traditional knowledge,  by  definition,  is  not  something new  or 
innovative but the distillation of practices or knowledge which has measurable effects 
and  is  in  the  social  domain-albeit 
often  in  a  limited  part  of  the  world.  In  these 
circumstances should traditional knowledge be protected at all? If intellectual property 
protection was limited to patent law, there would be strong arguments for limiting the 
extension  of  intellectual  property  protection  and  excluding  the  protection  of 
traditional knowledge.  But  intellectual property  is  not  limited  to  patents. There  is 
strong  enforcement  of  rules  for  the  protection  of  trademarks  and  geographical 
indications. Both  of these branches of intellectual property  have elements which  are 
similar  to  traditional  knowledge:  geographical  indications  are  collective  rights; 
trademarks are not innovative in the same way as patents and give lasting benefits to 
their promoters. 

87  See also J.-Ch. Van Eeckhaute, Legal Issue3 on  Traditional Knowledge Protection on the International Agenda: The 
EUApproach, Intellectual Property Law: Articles on Cultural Expressions and Indigenous Knowledge, Molengrafka 
2002, pp. 139-148. 

698 

THE  

The establishment of a common system for the protection of traditional knowledge 
and the creation of rights which gve benefits to its holders may  stimulate innovation 
and the spread of knowledge from limited communities to the  global community. It 
may wcll  serve the traditional justification of the protection of intellectual property. If 
this is accepted, then it appears appropriate to limit the benefits of the protection in time 
just as patents are limited in time. The time limitation may be different from other time 
limits  in  intellectual  property  but  the  idea  of  a  time  limit  on  protection  appears 
reasonable once dissemination of the knowledge has taken place. This type of time limit 
would  serve  the  setting of  a  balance  between  the  need  to  reward  and  the  need  to 
promote the general benefits. 

What forms of registration of traditional knowledge can be devised and how should 
the protection be  maintained across borders? The EC approach in  the  current WTO 
discussions  would  appear  to  have  merit.  Common  standards  should  be  set  at  the 
international  level  with  broad  implementation  powers  set  at  the  State  level.  Any 
definitions of traditional knowledge should be flexible so as to allow for local variations 
to  encompass what is  considered traditional knowledge in  the local community. The 
definition of the beneficiaries of any protection of traditional knowledge should be set 
at the local level as much as possible. 

The  key  debate remains  stuck  on the  issue  of whether  to  extend the  family  of 
intellectual property to include traditional knowledge or not. In practice, however, the 
issue  has  been  resolved.  States  have  decided  in  ad  hoc  ways  to  protect  traditional 
knowledge  and  are  now  seeking ways  to  make  that  protection  effective in  a  global 
market. In these circumstances, it is hard to argue that international protection should 
only be afforded to traditional intellectual property and not to traditional knowledge. A 
balance will have to be found between the promoters of the international protection of 
patents and trademarks and the promoters of the protection of traditional knowledge. 


