The Role of Intellectual Property Law  in Regional 

Commercial Unions 

Michael BLAKENEY* 

I. 

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

third,  emancipation  from  cultural  and 

At  the  end of the  Second World War,  the road  to economic development was 
conceived primarily  by  developing countries in  three  overlapping stages:  first,  the 
securing  of  political  emancipation  &om  their  colonial  overlords;  second,  the 
achievement  of  economic  independence,  through  the  nationalization  of  foreign- 
owned  businesses;  and 
technological 
dependence upon  the  Western industrialized States. The latter aim  was  reflected in 
the  Declaration  on  the  Establishment  of  the  New  International  Economic  Order 
(NIEO) which  was  adopted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Nations  in 
December  1974.’ Among  the  central assumptions of  proponents  of  the  NIEO was 
that  technological development was  a  pre-condition  for economic development and 
that  an  intellectual  property  system  was  indispensable  for  the  acquisition  of 
technology.  The  perceived  significance  of  the  role  of  intellectual  property  in 
economic development probably explains the establishment of the World Intellectual 
Property  Organization  (Wiro)  in  1970  as  a  specialized  agency  of  the  United 
Nations.  Thus,  the  Preamble  to  WIPO’S Model  Law  for  Developing Countries  on 
Inventions affirms: 

“(a) 

(b) 

the  importance  of  new  technology  for  economic  development  and  in  particular 
the industrialization of the country; 
the  necessity  of creating new  technology in  the  country  and  of  adapting existing 
technology to the needs of the country; 
the necessity of having access to foreign technology;” 

(c) 
Similarly, WIPOS Licensing Guide  for  Developing Countries  commences with 

the assertion that: 

“Industrialization  is  a  major  objective  of  developing  countries  as  a  means  to  the 
attainment  of  high  levels  of  the  well-being  of  the  peoples  of  such  countries.  The 

* Director, Asia  Pacific htellectual Property Law Institute, Murdoch Univenity,  Perth, Australia. 
‘  Genera1 Assenibly Resolution 3201  (S-vi),  12 December 1974. 
WIIW, Modrl Larcffbr Devrkopinx  Coitritrirs on  invrntions, Vol.  1,  WIIW, Geneva,  1979. 

692 

T H E  J O U R N A L  O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

the  promulgation  of 

twenty  years  on  from 

attainment  of  science  and  the  development  of  a  technological base  are  the  essential 
conditions of industrial growth. 
The  development  of  a  technological  base  in  a  developing country  depends  on  the 
existence  of  indigenous  technological  capacities  and 
the  acquisition  of  selected 
technology from abroad ...” 
However,  some 

the  New 
International  Economic  Order,  scepticism  has  begun  to  be  expressed  by  some 
commentators  about  the  role  of  intellectual  property  in  attracting  technology  and 
foreign  in~estment.~ First,  it  has  been  noted  that  the  technological  imbalance 
between  North  and  South  has  not  changed  much  in  the  last  two  decades, 
notwithstanding  the widespread adoption of intellectual  property  rights  in the  South. 
Indeed,  it  is  asserted  that  the  international  intellectual  property  system  is  not  cost- 
free for  the  countries  of  the  South  and  that  it  is,  in  fact,  a  means  for  perpetuating 
the  economic  dominance  of  the  North.s  The  economic  success,  until  recently,  of 
the Asian  “Dragon”  economies of Singapore,  Hong Kong,  South Korea  and Taiwan, 
which  was  achieved in the absence  of adequate  enforcement  of intellectual  property 
laws,  has  also  called  into  question  the  equation  between  intellectual  property  and 
economic  development.6  Similarly,  the  lack  of  economic  success  of  developing 
countries with  fairly stringent intellectual  property  regimes,  such  as  Nigeria,  has  also 
raised  questions  about 
in  promoting 
development.’ 

intellectual  property 

the  efficacy  of 

Despite  perceptions  of  the  failure  of  intellectual  property  to  deliver  economic 
development,  intellectual  property  law  has  not  been  abandoned  as  a  false  god.  The 
continuation  of the  orthodoxy  can  be  seen,  for  example,  in  the  first  clause  of  the 
Joint  Statement  of  the  Tokyo  Asia-Pacific  Economic  Co-operation  Forum  (APEC) 
Industrial  Property  Rights  Symposium of 28 and 29 August  1996, which  confirmed 
“the important  role  of industrial  property  systems in encouraging  inventive activities 
as well as in facilitating transfer of technology among Member  economies.” 

As  will  be  seen  below,  in  place  of the  assumption  that  economic  development 
can  be  secured  by  a  country’s  own  efforts,  is  the  realisation  that  economic 
development  involves  a  co-operative  effort  and  that  regional  co-operation  is  the 
more  efficient  modality  for  securing  economic  development.  The  new  role  for 
intellectual  property 
laws  in  the  1990s  and  beyond  is  in  strengthening  and 
reinforcing  regional  economic  co-ordination. 

WIPO, Lirrrrsirp Giridr&r  Drvclopit7.q  Coirntries,  WIIW, Geneva,  1977, p.  17. 
See,  for  example,  thc  authorities  referred  to  in  B.  Sodipo,  Pirncy  nrid  Corrtifc$itiri,y;  GATT TRIPS nnd 

Dridopiii‘q Corrntries,  Kluwer,  London,  1997, pp.  6 7 4 8 .  

5  G.T. Mukubwa, Paterits  atid  Teclitrolopy TrorFjcr  to  Druclopiti,~ Coiftitries (1975-77), Zamhlan  Law Jnl  1. 

1P toke  Credit? 24 Managing  1P  7, 

See, for example, E. Cheong and G. Miranda, Sircress  iri  Sin‘qopon-Can 

1994. ’ See, for example,  Sodipo, rirprn,  footnote 4,  at pp.  68-69. 

IP LAW  IN REGIONAL COMMERCIAL UNIONS 

693 

11.  REGIONAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

The  regionalization  of  trade  has  been  a  pronounced  trend  in  recent  years.  A 
1994 report  refers  to  thirty-four  regional  trade  arrangements in  existence in  1992, 
with seventeen in the pipeline.'  Regional trade arrangements take  a variety of forms, 
ranging from  a  bilateral exchange of tariff preferences, through  to  the  establishment 
of  an  economic  union,  where  two  or  more  countries  agree  to  unify  their  fiscal 
monetary  and  social  policies. Within  this  range  are  fiee  trade  areas,  where  two  or 
more  countries  abolish  all  import  duties  on  their  mutual  trade,  but  retain  their 
existing tariffs  against the  rest  of the world.  The next  stage  in regionalization is  the 
establishment of  a  customs union  where  the  abolition  of  mutual  import  duties  is 
matched by  the  adoption  of  a  common  external tariff on imports fiom  the  rest  of 
the world. A common market is  established where the  members of a  customs union 
also  agree to allow the free movement of all factors of production between member 
countries. 

A  feature of regional trading arrangements is  that  they attract reciprocal  trading 
advantages  with  other  regional  trade  groupings  and  that  they  may  contain  sub- 
regional  trading  arrangements.  For  example,  at  the  periphery  of  the  EU  is  the 
Central  European  Free  Trade  Association  (CEFTA) and  the  European  Free  Trade 
Association  (EFTA) which  have  both  indicated  a  desire to  combine with  the  EU to 
establish  the European Economic Area  (EEA). The EEA will be  a European-wide  free 
trade  zone.  Reciprocal  trading  arrangements  have  been  negotiated  with  other 
regional trade groupings. 

In  Asia,  the  regional  trade  arrangement  which  has  the  closest  resemblance  to 
the  European  arrangements is  the  ASEAN Free  Trade  Area  (AFTA), which  is  to  be 
established by  the Association of South-East  Asian  Nations (ASEAN). Within ASEAN, 
similar  intra-regional  trading  arrangements  are  proposed  for  the  countries  of  the 
Mekong  River  Basin  Group.  A  number  of  prominent  ASEAN Members  are  also 
members  of  the  Asia-Pacific  Economic  Co-operation  Forum,  which  is  an  inter- 
regional trading arrangement. 

Similar trade arrangements can be noted in the Western hemisphere. The North 
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), between Canada, Mexico and the United 
States,  is  a  free  trade  zone  in  which  full  economic  integration  is  not  yet 
contemplated.  NAFTA is  currently  discussing  an  association  with  the  Common 
Market  of  the  Southern  Cone  countries  (MERCOSUII). The  latter  association  has 
recently been  involved in negotiations for  a formal union  with  the Andean group of 
countries. President  Clinton  has  referred  to  the  establishment  of  a  free  trade  zone 
from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego by  2005." 

*  East Asia  Analytical  Unit,  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs and  Trade  (Australia),  A s i : A N   Frer  Zndr Arm: 
9  A. Alhadeff, lntroditrtory Note (to the Protocol of Ouro Preto), 34 ILM 1245. 

Trndinx Bloc or  Building  Bloc?  Canberra  AGPS, 1994, p.  7. 

694 

THE JOURNAL O F  WOILLU  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The  current  theory  of  regional  trade  arrangements  is  that  a  larger  internal 
market  creates opportunities  for  the  exploitation  of scale economies,  by  allowing for 
a  higher  degree  of  specialization  in  production.  This  in  turn  may  enhance  the 
international competitiveness of the region  and attract foreign investment. 

It  should  be  noted  that  some  regional  trading  arrangements,  particularly  those 
between  developing  countries,  were  established  as  barriers 
to  encourage 
industrialization  behind  protectionist  walls. These  included  the  Latin  American  Free 
Trade  Association  (LAIA) and  the  Andean  Pact.  Strict  controls  on  the  transfer  of 
technology  were  part  of the  legal  structure  of these  defensive unions.  These  South- 
South  regional  groupings  were 
largely  dxredited  as  vehicles  for  economic 
development  by  the  spectacular  success  in  the  1960s  and  1970s  of  the  newly 
industrializing  economies  (NIES) of  East  Asia.  However  an  important  positive 
example  for  development  was  provided  by  the  EU,  and  even  the  East  Asian  NIES 
saw the wisdom  of regionalization  with  the formation of ASEAN. 

Additionally,  regionalism  in  trade  was  encouraged  by  the  GATT  system. 
Regional  integration  is explicitly endorsed  in Article  XXIV  of the  GATT which  refers 
to  “the  desirability  of  increasing  fi-eedom  of  trade  by  the  development,  through 
voluntary  arrangements,  of  closer  integration  between  the  economies  of  such 
arrangements .” 

111.  REGIONALISM 

AND THE WORLI) TILADE ORGANIZATION 
(WTO) 

In April  1996, Renato Ruggerio, the WTO Director-General,  declared that: 
“ ... the main  challenge facing the multilateral system at present,  one which  will shape its 
future and  help  shape the world  of the twenty-first  century ... is  to  ensure  that  national 
barriers  are  not just replaced by  regional  ones but that, on the contrary, regionalism and 
multilateralism converge at the end of the road.” ”’ 
It  is  paradoxical  that  at  the  birth  of  the  WTO,  the  multdaterahsm  which  that 
institution  symbolizes is challenged by  the widespread  establishment of regional  trade 
arrangements.  A  WTO report  identified  the  creation,  between  1947 and  1995, of 
more  than  one  hundred  regional  commercial  arrangements. ’ ’  The  Ministerial 
Declaration  issued  by  the  WTO at  its  first  biennial  Ministerial  Meeting,  held  at 
Singapore in December  1996, noted  that: 

“...  trade relations of WTO Members  are being increasingly  influenced  by  regional trade 
agreements  that  have  expanded  vastly  in  number,  scope  and  coverage.  Such  initiatives 
can  promote  hrther  liberalization  and  may  assist  least-developed,  developing  and 
transitional  economies  in  integrating  into  the  international  trading  system  ...  Tbe 
expansion and  extent  of regional trade  agreements make it important to analyse whether 

1996: at http://www.wto.org/wto/prrss/prrss.htm. 

lo WTO Press  Release/46,  Regional  liiitiativcs  Shortld  Aim .fir  n  Free  Gluhnl M d z e f ,  Snys  Ruggerio,  24  April 
I  WTo,  Regiiiria/isiii: at http://www.wto.org/wto/about/beyondO.htrn. 

IF’ LAW  IN  REGIONAL  COMMERCIAL  UNIONS 

695 

the  system of  WTO rights  and  obligations  as  it  relates  to  regional  trade  arrangements 
needs to be clarified.” 12 
A  report  prepared  by  Japan’s  Ministry  of  International  Trade  and  Industry 
(MITI) estimated that  some  90 percent  of WTO Members  were  parties to  regional 
trade  arrangements of  the  type  subject to  GATT n~tification.’~ The  Report  noted 
that  although  regional  integration could  have  trade  creation  effects,  to  the  extent 
that  it  promoted  competition  by  eliminating  barriers  to  trade  among  Member 
countries, there could be trade diversion effects where the comfort of a  trade barrier 
resulted in  the  &version of trade  from efficient non-Member  countries. The WTO, 
in its  1997 Annual Report,  warned of the necessity for regional trading arrangements 
to  be  compatible with  the  rules  and  objectives  of  the  multilateral  trading  system 
embodied  in  the  WTO.’~ It  identified  the  need  for  coherence  among  the  various 
regional groupings, particularly where  there  is  overlap between  them; the  necessity 
to  work  towards  consistent policy  approaches between  regional  groupings;  and  to 
ensure  that  in  the  allocation  of  resources,  adequate  attention  is  paid  to  the 
multilateral process. The Report warned that: 

“ ... one  very practical danger of the  multiplication of regional  and multilateral activities 
governments and administrators  and the conflicting pressures they create.”  ’ 
is the  risk of incoherence stemming horn the  sheer time  taken  up  by  such  activities  for 
The  WTO  initially  established  some  twenty  working  parties  to  examine  and 
monitor regional trade agreements. In February  1996, the process was  streamlined by 
the establishment of a Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA). In its first 
meeting in May  1996, some forty-five regional trading agreements were referred to it. 

IV.  REGIONAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS AND  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

As  will be discussed  below, an  apparently essential feature of the major regional 
trade  agreements is  the harmonization of intellectual property arrangements. At  first 
blush, there would appear to be some inconsistency between the national exclusivity 
which 
intellectual  property  right-holders  under  national 
intellectual property  laws  of  the  members  of  regional  commercial  unions  and  the 
elimination of barriers to the free movement of trade within the union. 

is  conferred  upon 

This apparent paradox is  accommodated by  two stratagems. First, it is sought to 
replace the multiplicity of national intellectual property systems with a unitary system 
within  the  commercial  union.  The  first  step  towards  this  unitary  system  is  the 

’’ WTO, Sinppore  Ministerial  Declaration,  18  December  1996:  at  http://www.wto.org/ddf/daily/cgi-bill/ 

13  MITI, japan,  Report  on  the  WTO Consisremy  qf  Eade  Po/icirs  by  Major  Eadinx  Partners,  April  1997:  at 

searchp. 

http://wnv.jpomiti.go.jp/. 

WTO, Annual  Report,  1997, WTO, Geneva,  1997, p. 4. 
Ibid., p. 26. 

696 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

is 

typically  justified 

intellectual  property.  Regional  arrangements  for 

harmonization of the national laws  of member countries. A supplementary stratagem 
is  to  exonerate intellectual property  laws  from  the  free  movement  rules  within  the 
union.  This  exoneration 
important 
developmental  role  of 
the 
harmonization of  intellectual property  go  some  way  towards  meeting  the  tripartite 
concerns  expressed  by  the  WTO with  the  coherence,  consistency  and  allocative 
efficiency of regional trade arrangements. Regional  harmonization takes place  within 
the  context of a  tradltion of global intellectual property harmonization in which  the 
application of  the  principle  of national  treatment  ensures that  nationals  outside  the 
regional  arrangement  are  treated  no  less  favourably  than  nationals  of  member 
countries. 

terms  of 

the 

in 

Members of  the  WTO are  all  signatories of  the  Agreement  on  Trade-Related 
Aspects  of Intellectual Property Rights  (TRIPS) which  prescribes legislative norms for 
the  protection  and  enforcement  of  intellectual  property  rights  by  Member 
countries."  The  Council  for  TiuPs,  established  under  Article  68  of  the  TIUPS 
Agreement, monitors  the  compliance  of  Members  with  their  obligations under  the 
Tiups Agreement. The TKIPS Agreement provides  a  number  of limited exceptions 
from  compliance with  its  obligations. The most  important  of these  for  members  of 
regional  trade  arrangements is  the  exemption  provided  by  Article  4(d) from  most- 
favoured-nation  treatment for  the signatories of international agreements which  pre- 
date  Tiui's  and  which  have  been  notified  to  the  TRIPS Council.  To  date  some 
forty-three  such agreements have been notified to the TRIPS Council. 

The following sections examine the role  of intellectual property laws  in regional 

trade associations in Europe, Asia  and North  and South America. 

A.  The European  Union 

Probably  the  most  compelling example of the  evolution from  preferential tariff 
arrangements to  full  economic  union  is  provided  by  the  European  Union.  The EU 
developed  from  a  co-operative  arrangement  in  relation  to  coal  and  steel  into  a 
common  market  and,  with  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  has  been  transformed  into  an 
economic union.  The EU is  committed to  a  unitary monetary and  economic policy 
by  the  year  2000,  although  this  latter  step  has  not  been  embraced  with  full 
enthusiasm by  all its Members. 

A  central  feature  of  the  European  Common  Market  was  the  prohibition,  by 
Article  30  of  the  Treaty of  Rome,  of  restrictions  inhibiting  the  free  movement  of 
goods.  Specifically exonerated  from  this  prohibition,  by  Article  36,  are  restrictions 

16 

See  M.  Blakeney,  Trade-Rtloted  Aspects  cf 

A,yrwnrrnt, Sweet  & Maxwell, London,  1996. 

Infclleciiml  Propprfy  Riyhfs:  A  Con&  Ciiidr  ro  the  TrtrPs 

IP  LAW  IN REGIONAL  COMMERCIAL UNIONS 

697 

for the  protection  of intellectual property rights, provided that  they are not  a  means 
of arbitrary discrimination or a dsguised restriction of trade between Member States. 
The tension between  the  conferral of  a  statutory monopoly by  intellectual property 
laws  and  the  elimination of  restrictive trade practices within  a  commercial union  is 
accommodated by  the insistence, in Article 36, that the fiee movement  of goods be 
inhibited  only  to  the  extent  necessary  to  safeguard  the  rights  which  constitute the 
specific subject-matter of the type of intellectual property right in question. In order 
to  provide  some  degree  of  predictability  and  certainty,  the  European  Commission 
has  enacted regulations which grant clearance to certain types  of intellectual property 
agreement. These block exemptions embrace: 

research and development agreements; and 

-  patent licensing agreements; 
-  know-how  licensing agreements; 
- 
-  fian~hising.’~ 
The different national patent laws  of Member  countries of the  then  EEC were 
identified at an  early  stage  as  an  obstacle to  the free movement of goods withm  the 
Community.18 From  1959, the possibihty of a  single EEC patent was  canvassed.  The 
successful  conclusion  of  the  Patent  Co-operation  Treaty  in  1970  gave  decisive 
impetus  to  this  proposal.  The resultant European  Patent  Convention  (EPc), which 
was  signed in Munich in  1973, introduced a unitary system for the administration of 
patents  within  Europe.  This  development  has  been  particularly  successful,  and 
membership  of  the  EPC has  become  attractive  also  to  non-EU  States.  Thus,  in 
addition  to  the  EU  States,  participants  in  the  EPC also  include  Switzerland  and 
Liechtenstein, and the  Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, the  Slovak Republic-the 
signatories of the  Central European Free Trade Agreement. Additionally, the former 
Soviet  States,  which  have  combined  in  the  Eurasian  Patent  Agreement  have  also 
manifested  an  interest  in  subscribing to  the  EPC. In  this  way,  intellectual property 
laws  may  be  seen not  only as  assisting  the  cohesion  of the EC,  but  also  in  assisting 
the  expansion of the  EC through  inter-regional  fiee  trade  agreements. In  1994 the 
EEA was  constituted as  a  fiee  trade  association between  the  EU and  certain former 
Members  of  the  European  Free  Trade  Association.  In  1995 Austria,  Finland  and 
Sweden became fully-fledged  Members  of the  EC,  with  the  remaining EFTA States 
(Iceland,  Liechtenstein  and  Norway)  participating  as  Members  of  the  EEA.”  The 
first  significant  co-operation  between  EU  and  EFTA Members  was  through  the 
European Patent Convention. 

The centralization of EC trade-mark  laws was  sought to  be  achieved through  a 
combination  of  a  Regulation  under  the  Treaty  of  Rome  and  a  Directive  to 

” See V.L. Korah, Patent  Competition and  EEC Competition Rules: Regulation  2349/84, Esc, Oxford,  1985. 
See W.R. Cornish,  Intellectual  Property:  Patents,  Copyright,  Eade Marks  and  AIlied  Rights,  (third  edition), 
1 %  

Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1996, p.  103. 

lY Switzerland, the last  of the EFTA States, remains  outside the EU. 

698 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Approximate  the  Laws  of  Member  States  Relating 
to  Trade  Marks  (the 
“Harmonisation Directive”) .20  Ths centralization process envisages the establishment 
of  a  unitary  “Community  Trade  Mark”,  together with  a  parallel  harmonization  of 
national trade-mark  systems. 

A  successful  feature  of  the  EU  intellectual  property 
strategy  has  been  the 
offices  in  Munich  and 
establishment  of  single  European  patents  and  trade-marks 
the  administration  of 
Alicante,  respectively.  In  addition  to  binding  together 
intellectual property  laws  in  the  EU,  this  co-ordination  has 
also  facilitated the  EU- 
wide  observance  of  Member  nations’  obligations  under 
the  TRIPS Agreement, 
compliance with  which  is  a  prerequisite for  membership  of  the  WTO.”  Thus,  an 
incidental developmental role  of  intellectual property co-ordmation  within  the EU, 
is  facilitation  of  each  Member nation’s capacity to  subscribe to  TKIPS. In  this way, 
the EU as a whole can take advantage of the trading benefits which are available  on 
a  reciprocal basis  from  inter-regional  agreements. The European  patents  and  trade- 
marks  offices  have  also  participated in  the  developmental mission  of  the  EU,  even 
outside Europe. For example, the European Commission’s ASEAN Patents and Trade- 
Marks  Programme,  which  is  located  in  the  European  Patent  Office  (EPo),  has 
conducted a  vigorous programme of assistance  within the  ASEAN to  assist  the latter 
in its  own regional programme of intellectual property co-ordination.22 

B.  The Central  European Free  Trade Agreement 

The  CEFTA was  signed  on  21  December  1992  by  the  Czech  Republic, 
Hungary, Poland  and  the  Slovak  Republic  (the “Visegrad Four”). The Agreement, 
whch  went  into  effect  on  1  March  1993,  includes  six  Annexes  and  seven 
Protocols.23 The  main  objective of  the  CEFTA is  to  create a  free  trade  area  withm 
Central Europe by  2001. Article 25.4 provides for the co-operation  of the parties in 
intellectual  property  matters.  It  provides  for  joint  expert  consultations  on  these 
matters, “in particular  on  activities relating to the  existing or  to  hture international 
conventions  on  harmonization,  administration  and  enforcement  of  intellectual 
property”  and  on  activities in  international organizations, “as  well  as  relations  of 
Parties with third countries on matters concerning intellectual property”. 

Article 25.1  of the Agreement provides that  the parties  “shall grant  and  ensure 
protection  of  intellectual property  rights  on  a  non-discriminatory  basis,  incluchng 
measures for  the  grant  and  enforcement of such  rights.”  Article 25.1  envisages  that 
intellectual  property  protection  shall  be  improved  withn  five  years  to  “a  level 
corresponding to  the  substantive standards of the  multilateral agreements which  are 

’‘  See Blakeney, supra, footnote  16. 
20  See G. Kur, Harmonization ofthe  Trade-Mark Laws in Europe-An  Overuiau,  28  IIC  1, 1997. 
’*  See N. Heath, EC-ASEAN Parents and  Eade-Marks  Programme, 27  IIC  76,  1996. 
23 Reproduced  in 34 ILM 3, 1995. 

IP LAW  IN REGIONAL COMMERCIAL UNIONS 

699 

specified  in  Annex  VI.”  Annex  VI  lists  the  Paris,  Berne  and  Rome  intellectual 
property Conventions, as well as  the European Patent C ~ n v e n t i o n . ~ ~  

VI.  ASIA 

A,  The Association  of  South-East Asian Nations 

The  ASEAN was  established  in  1967, by  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  the  Puppines, 
Singapore and Thailand. The original objectives of the Association were to promote 
the  cultural,  economic  and  social  well-being  of  the  region  through  co-operative 
programmes;  to  safeguard  the  political and  economic  stability of  the  region  against 
big-power  rivalries;  and  to  serve  as  a  forum  for  the  resolution  of  inter-regional 
hfferences.  An  ASEAN Preferential  Trading  Agreement  was  introduced  in  1977 
under  which  Member  nations  exchanged  tariff  preferences.  This  Agreement  was 
superseded by  the  decision  of  the  Fourth  ASEAN Summit in  1992 to  establish  the 
ASEAN Free  Trade  Area  by  2008.  A  supplementary  declaration in  September 1994 
accelerated the foundation of the AFTA to 2003. 

On  15  December  1995,  ASEAN Member  countriesz5 adopted  a  Framework 
Agreement on Intellectual Property Co-operation.26 Emulating the European model, 
the  Framework  Agreement  envisages  the  establishment of  an  ASEAN patents  and 
trade-marks  system,  including ASEAN Patent  and  Trade-Marks   office^.'^  Intellectual 
property  co-operation  is  envisaged  for  the  fields  of  “copyright  and  related  rights, 
patents, 
industrial  designs,  geographical  indications,  undisclosed 
information and layout designs  of  integrated circuits.y7zx The Framework Agreement 
recited  the  obligations  of  Member  States  to  implement  intra-ASEAN  intellectual 
property  arrangements  in 
international  intellectual  property 
obligations, in particular, their obligations under  the WTO TRIPS Agreement.z9 

trade  marks, 

line  with 

their 

Among  the  co-operative  measures  to  enhance  the  enforcement of  intellectual 
property  rights,  the  Framework  Agreement  proposes  co-operation  in  cross-border 
protection  and  the  networlung  of  ASEAN judicial  authorities  and  enforcement 
agen~ies.~’ Additionally, the Agreement proposes the networking of training facilities 
and the exchange of per~onnel.~’ 

24  34 ILM  19, 1995. 
25  ASEAN then comprised Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Victnarn. 
*‘  35  ILM  1072, 1996. 
’*  Ibid.; Article 3.1. 
” Ibid.. Article  1.4 (ASEAN Patents Ofice); Article 1.5 (ASEAN Trade-Marks  Office). 
*’  See M.  Blakeney, The Impacf .f fhe TRIPS Agreement  is fke Asia  Pacific Region,  10 EIPR 544, 1996. 
x’  Article 3.3.1. 
3’  Article  3.3.4. 

700 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Prior  to  the  1995 Bangkok  Summit,  ASEAN had  hesitated  to  involve  itself  in 
intellectual property matters, tahng the  view  that  intellectual property rights tended 
to  the  perpetuation  of  trade  imbalances  between  developed  and  developing 
c~untries.~’ The  Bangkok  Declaration  was  accompanied  by  expressions  of  the 
importance  of  the  interrelationship  between  trade,  investment  and  intellectual 
property.  The  first  proposal  for  co-operation  on  intellectual property  was  made  to 
the  ASEAN Senior  Economic  Officers  Meeting  (SEOM) in Jakarta,  in  August  1994. 
Thailand  chaired  the  first  meeting  of  ASEANS Workmg  Group  on  Intellectual 
Property, which met at Chiang Mai in September 1994. As  chair, Thailand proposed 
the  first  drafit  of  the  Framework Agreement  in  the  context  of  the  establishment of 
the  AFTA. The Bangkok  Summit Declaration, which  accompanied  the  Framework 
Agreement,  acknowledged  “the  importance  of  intellectual property  in  intra-AsEAN 
and world trade”.33 

European  advisers  have  been  assisting  ASEAN in  its  planning  for  an  ASEAN 
patent  and  trade-mark  system  through  the  EC-ASEAN Patents  and  Trade-Marks 
Programme  (EcAP). ECAP provided  consultative  assistance  for  the  drafting  of  the 
Framework Agreement and  has  provided  regional  and  national  intellectual property 
training  programmes for  government  officials  and  lawyers  in  ASEAN. This  explains 
the  essentially  European  appearance  of  the  co-operative  intellectual  property 
arrangements within ASEAN. 

In  the  Special Meeting  of ASEAN in July  1997, which  welcomed  the  admission 
of Laos  and Myanmar  into ASEAN, the  intention  of Members to  establish  an  ASEAN 
intellectual property union,  as  part  of  a  commercial union,  was  reiterated. The  First 
Informal  Leaders’  Summit,  held  at  Jakarta  on  30  November  1996,  endorsed  the 
Basic  Framework  of  the  ASEAN Mekong  Basin  Development  Co-operation,  to 
promote  the  economic  integration  of  economies  of  the  ASEAN and  non-AsEAN 
riparian States. 

B. 

Intellectual  Property  Co-operation between  Mekong  River Basin  Countries 

Parallelling  its  intellectual  property  initiatives  within  ASEAN, has  been  the 
comparable initiative by  Thailand  among the  countries of the  Mekong River Basin: 
Cambodia,  Laos,  Myanmar  and  Vietnam.  This  initiative  commenced  with  a 
Memorandum of Understandmg on Bilateral Co-operation  in  the  Field of Industrial 
Property, which was  signed by  Thailand and Vietnam  on 22 April  1994. This MoU, 
which  pre-dated  Vietnamese  membership  of  L ~ S E A N , ~ ~  
contained  many  of  the 
ingredients  of the  Framework Agreement.  It  proposed  bilateral  co-operation  in  the 

32 

Sirat, Intellectual  Property  Co-operation amonz  Association .f South-East Asian Nations  (ASEAN): Present and 
Future Plans,  WIPO Sub-Regional Round Table on the  Implications  of the  ASEAN Free  Trade  Area  (AFTA) on 
the  Intellectual Property System, Jakarta,  9-10  May  1997. 

Bangkok Summit Declaration of  1995, Article  8,  35 ILM  1067, 1996. 

33 
34  Vietnam became a  Member of ASEAN  at the Bangkok Summit, December  1995. 

IP LAW IN REGIONAL COMMERCIAL  UNIONS 

701 

exchange  of information  and  staff,  comparative studies of procedures  and  practices, 
use  of  automation,  and  dissemination of  information  on  industrial property.35 The 
MoU was  followed  by  a  Co-operation  Programme, which  was  promulgated  on  17 
February  1995 and  which  was  initiated  with  a  joint  working  group  to  determine 
common  criteria on well-known  trade  marks.  On 7 December  1996, Thailand  and 
Vietnam  signed an  MoU on Copyright  and  Neighboring  Rights,  which proposed  a 
plan of co-operation  similar to that proposed for industrial property. 

Similar  bilateral  arrangements  in  relation  to  industrial  property  were  made 
between  Thailand  and  Laos  by  a  Memorandum  on  14  August  1994.  A  Plan  of 
Actions on Industrial Property was  agreed between Laos  and Thailand on 30 January 
1996, proposing information  exchanges and  linkages between  the  Thai  Department 
of  Intellectual  Property  and  the  Lao  Science,  Technology  and  Environment 
Organization.  Preliminary  consultative  meetings  have  also  been  held  between 
Thailand  and  Myanmar  and  between  Thailand  and  Cambodia 
to  establish 
arrangements for intellectual property co-operation. 

Thailand  has  also  been  conducting  negotiations  on  intellectual  property  co- 
operation with  the  People’s  Republic  of China.  Memoranda of Understanding were 
signed  between  Thailand  and  China  in  the  fields  of  trade  marks  (6  April  1995), 
patents  (7  April  1995), and  copyright  (1  December  1995).  A  major  objective  of 
these MoUs is  the promotion  of regional co-operation in intellectual property. 

The Thai architect of these bilateral intellectual property arrangements identified 
as  “the  most significant development” the  “clear determination to  co-operate  closely 
and  endeavour to  reach  common  positions in  both  bilateral  and ASEAN contexts.’’36 
The various bilateral arrangements which  Thailand  has  negotiated with  the Mekong 
River  Basin  Group  of Countries will  no doubt  strengthen its  position  as  the  leader 
in  this  field  in  ASEAN. For  example, in  the  1996 meetings of the  Paris  and  Berne 
Unions,  Thailand  was  elected  Chair  of  the  Asia  group  of  developing  countries. A 
regional  consultative meeting  convened  by  Thailand  at  Chiang  Mai  formulated an 
Asian  position  for  the  WIPO Diplomatic  Conference  on  Copyright  in  December 
1996. The leadership which  Thailand  has  assumed  in  regional  intellectual property 
arrangements  will  inevitably  enhance  its  position  in  the  negotiations  which  will 
ensue concerning the location of the ASEAN Patent and Trade-Mark  Offices. 

~~ 

35 W.  Weerawmawit,  The Risitig  Tide  qf  Rqional  Co-operation  on  Intellecrtd  Property:  Thailand’s Rolr  and 

Inifiativr5, Department  of Intellectual  Property,  Annual Report  1YY6,  45, at p.  48. 

36  Id. 

702 

T H E  JOUKNAL  O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PI<OPEl1TY 

C .   The Asia-Paciic Economic  Co-operation Fomm 

The  origins of APEC are  traced back  to  the  informal  consultation between the 
heads  of  Asia-Pacific  States  and  senior  ministers  and  department  heads  which 
commenced  in  1989 on  the  initiative  of  the  then  Australian  Prime  Minister,  Bob 
H a ~ k e . ~ ’  A  successful  example  of  regional  consultation  had  been  provided  by  the 
Pacific  Economic  Co-operation  Council  (PEcc),  a  non-governmental  organization 
comprising  academic,  business  and  government  representatives  from  some  twenty 
Pacific  Rim  countries.  The  PECC operated  as  an  informal  advisory  body,  with  a 
number  of  committees which  disseminated  information  on  trade,  technology  and 

investment. ‘’ 

In  anticipation  of  the  conclusion  of  the  Uruguay  Round  of  GATT, the  APEC 
Trade  Ministers,  meeting  in  Seattle  in  November  1993,  agreed  that  they  would 
“review  the  results  of  the  Uruguay  Round  and  implications  for  the  region  and 
provide  assistance within  APEC on  implementation.” As  part  of this  review process, 
the  APEC Trade  Ministers  agreed,  in  October  1994,  to  “undertake  a  series  of 
seminars  designed  to  encourage  the  full  and  effective  implementation  of  Uruguay 
Round   outcome^."^'  To  this  end,  seminars were  held  in  Taipei,  13 to  15 March 
1995; Seoul, 17 to 21 April 1995; and Sydney,  17 to  19 May 1995. 

The overall objectives of  these  seminars were  identified  at  the  Sydney seminar 

to be to: 

“(i)  develop a collaborative approach to implementation of the TRIPS Agreement; 
(ii) 

identifi  scope for  an  APEC programme  of  co-operation  and  assistance  to  enhance 
regional  co-operation  and  assistance  to  enhance  regional  intellectual  property 
infrastructure, includmg consideration of an action agenda for APEC; 

(iii)  provide a forum in which APEC Members can exchange ideas and experiences on 

the approach being taken to implementation of the TRIPS Agreement; 
involve all APEC Members in discussion  of intellectual property issues.” 40 

(iv) 
Mr M.J. Costello, Secretary of the Australian Department  of Foreign Affairs  and 
Trade, noted  at the  Sydney APEC Seminar, that  regional co-operation on intellectual 
property matters had only latterly been addressed  by  APEC Members.4’ He attributed 
this  to  the  difficulty  of  the  issue  and  to  the  fact  of  the  different  levels  of 
development of the various APEC economies. To  attempt to develop the  intellectual 
property  agenda  of  APEC in  harmony  with  the  Bogor  De~laration,~~ 
committing 
Members to  free  trade  and  investment by  2010  for  developed economies  and  2020 

37  Participating  countries  included:  Australia,  Brunei,  Canada,  Chile,  China,  Hong  Kong,  Indonesia, 
Japan,  Korea,  Malaysia,  Mexico,  New  Zealand,  Papua  New  Guinea,  the  Philippines,  Singapore,  Taiwan, 
Thailand and the United States. 

38 See D.  Castan, A ~ i i c :  international  Institution? A  P Q C ~ ~ C  
39 

Solution,  15 U.  Tas L.  Rev.,  1996, 136, at p.  139. 
Address by  M.J.  Costello, Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade,  Intellectual  Property 
Rights; The Missing  Link  in Aafic:, APEC Seminar “Implementation of World Trade Organization  Agreement  on 
Trade-Related  Aspects  of Intellectual Property  Rights”,  Sydney,  17-19  May  1995 (henceforth  “Sydney APEC 
Seminar”). 

441  Background Papers and  Programme, Sydney AI’EC: Seminar, ibid. 
4 1   Id. 
42  The APEC Economic Leaders’  DeClQrQtiOn .f Comnton Res(iI~e, Bogor, Indonesia,  15 November 1994 

IP  LAW  IN REGIONAL COMMERCIAL UNIONS 

703 

for  developing  economies,  Mr  Costello  proposed  the  establishment  of  a  group  of 
experts and  the  formulation of  a  set  of recommendations for  the  development of  a 
programme of technical co-operation  on intellectual property issues. 

In  1995, the  eighteen APEC Trade Ministers adopted the Osaka Action Agenda, 
which  included the  liberalization of intellectual property rights  as one  of the  fifteen 
areas  where  Members  would  seek  the  liberahation  and  facilitation  of  trade  and 
investment. The overall objective was  that: 

“APEC economies will  ensure  adequate  and  effective  protection,  including  legislation, 
administrative  enforcement  of  intellectual  property  rights  in  the  Asia-Pacific  Region 
based  on  the  principles  of  MFN [most-favoured-nation]  treatment,  national  treatment 
and transparency, as  set out in the TRIPS Agreement and other related agreements.” 43 
Members  committed themselves to  seven key  items withm  a  Collective Action 
Plan  in  relation  to  intellectual  property,  including  the  full implementation  of  the 
TRIPS Agreement. The Osaka Action Agenda proposed the exchange of information 
and expertise on intellectual property matters, includmg the exchange of information 
“on  well-known  trade  marks  as  a  first  step  in  examining  the  possibhty  of 
establishing  an  APEc-wide  trade-mark  system.”44 The Japanese  Patent  Office  was 
allocated the  task  of  convening, in  1996,  three  “Intellectual Property  kghts Get- 
Togethers”  (IPK-GTs) by  way  of  a  sub-group  of APEC‘S Committee  on  Trade  and 
Investment (CTI). The meetings were  aimed at  developing detailed steps  within  the 
Action  Plans  for  the  implementation  of  the  intellectual  property  aspects  of  the 
Action Agenda.  In August  1996, an Industrial Property Rights  Symposium was  held 
at  Tokyo  for  senior  officials  of  the  industrial  property  authorities  of  all  eighteen 
APEC Member  economies.  At  this  meeting,  Members  pledged  their  “closer  co- 
operation in  developing industrial property  systems in  order  to provide  a  firm basis 
for hrther economic growth  towards the  twenty-first  century.7745 The signatories to 
the  Joint  Statement  issued  by  the  Tokyo  Meeting  recommended  that  &Ec-wide 
co-operation  should be promoted among Member economies with a view to: 

“1.  Implementing  the  TRIPS Agreement  in  the  case  of  WTO Members,  or  further 
improving  industrial property  rights  protection  in  other  cases,  in  order  to  ensure 
adequate  and  effective  protection  as  well  as  enforcement  of  industrial  property 
rights; 

2.  maintaining  a  fair  balance  of  interest  between  the  right-holders  and  the  public 

interest; 

3.  developing  human  resources  to  cope  with  rapid  increase  in  the  number  and 
complexity  of  patent,  trade-mark  and  related  applications  according  to  growing 
domestic and regional economies; 
promoting  the  simplification and standardization of administrative, examination and 
registration procedures  in  order  to  enable  applicants  to  acquire  rights  in  a  more 
expemtious and effective way; 

4. 

www:apecsec.org.sg/. 

43  APEC Committee on Trade  and  Investment, Press  Release, Intellrcrual  Property  Rights,  1996 at  http:// 
4 4 ~  http://www.apecsec.org.sg/etiipr.htm. 
45 joint  Statemenr  APEC Indu5frial  Property  Rights  Sympusium, 28-29  August  1996,  Toea,  c1.2:  at 

http://wwwjpomiti.go.jp/joints.htm. 

704 

THE JOURNAL  O F  WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

... 

5. 
6.  p e r i o d d l y  discussing appropriate industrial property  protection  systems  to  ensure 

that they remain effective for new and emerging technologies; 

7.  considering  further  improvements  to  industrial  property  systems  following  the 

implementation of TRIPS; and 
in implementing these initiatives, taking into account the difficulties and limitations 
which  each Member economy is or will be confronting.” 4h 

8. 

The IPK-GT held  two meetings,  in February and July  1997, the latter  in Taipei 
on  enforcement.  In  August  1997,  the  CTI reconstituted  the  IPR-GT  as  an  IPK 
Experts  Group  to  promote  greater  dialogue  on intellectual  property  policy  and  to 
assist  progress  on  collective  action  in  relation  to  intellectual  property  policy,  with  a 
view to the full implementation  of the TRIPS Agreement  by  the year 2000.47 

VII. THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT 

The  NAFTA was  entered  into  by  Canada,  Mexico  and  the  United  States  in 
December  1992. Part  S i x   of the  Agreement  contains  a  comprehensive  catalogue  of 
intellectual  property   provision^.^^  Article  1701.1  imposes  a  general  obligation  upon 
signatories  to  provide  “adequate  and  effective  protection  and  enforcement  of 
intellectual  property  rights”  to  each  other’s  nationals.  This  provision  is  amplified  in 
Article  1701.2 which  provides that  the minimum  guarantee  of adequate and  effective 
protection  of  intellectual  property  rights  is  met  by  the  parties  giving  effect  to  the 
Berne,  Paris  and  International  Union for  the Protection  of  New  Varieties  of Plants 
(UPOV) Conventions  and  to the  Geneva Phonograms  Convention. An  Annex  to this 
provision  requires  Mexico  to  accede  to  the  UPOV Convention  within  two  years  of 
the  signing  of  the  Agreement  and  exonerates  the  United  States  ffom  compliance 
with  Article  6bis  of the  Berne  Convention.  National  treatment  is  secured  by  Article 
1703.  The  control  of  abusive  or  anti-competitive  practice  or  condtions  in 
intellectual property  licences is permitted  in Article  1704. 

The TKIPS copyright provisions are amplified by Articles  1705 and  1706, which 
deal,  inter  d i d ,   with  rental  rights  in  relation  to  computer  programs  and  rights  in 
relation  to  sound  recordmgs.  Article  1707  contains  provisions  for  the  protection  of 
encrypted  program-carrying  satellite  signals.  Each  party  is  obliged  to  make  it  a 
criminal  offence  to  make  available any  decryption  device  without  the  authorization 
of the  lawful distributor  of a satellite signal and  to  make  it  a  civil offence to receive 
or dstribute an  encrypted  signal which  has  been  decoded  without  the  authorization 
of the legitimate  distributor of the signal. 

Article  1708 contains  fourteen  provisions  dealing  with  the  protection  of  trade 
marks.  These  contain  a  fairly  conventional  catalogue  of  requirements  for  a  trade- 
:; Ibid.,  c1.8. 

1997 Work  Progranmme of  the  Committee  on Trade  and  Investment:  at  http://www.apecsec.org.sg/cti/ 

partiii. htni. 

48  See 32  ILM  605, 1993, at  pp.  670-681. 

IP LAW  IN REGIONAL  COMMERCIAL UNIONS 

705 

mark  system  based  on  protection  through  registration.  Probably  to  deal  with  U.S. 
objections to  the  former Mexican requirement that  a  foreign mark  be  linked with  a 
local  mark,  Article  1708.10 prohibits  parties  from  encumbering  the  use  of  a  trade 
mark  with  special  requirements, such  as  use  with  another  trade  mark.  Compulsory 
licensing of trade marks is prohibited by  Article 1708.11. 

The  regulation  of  patenting,  provided  by  Article  1709,  and  the  protection  of 
layout designs  of semi-conductor  integrated circuits, provided by  Article  1710, fairly 
closely  mirror  the  TRIPS provisions  on  these  subjects.  An  Annex  to  Article  1710 
requires  Mexico  to  introduce  protection  for  layout  designs  within  four  years  of 
signing NAFTA. 

The  TRIPS provisions  which  deal  with  undisclosed  information  are  more 
specifically  focused by  Article  171 1, which  addresses  the  prevention  of trade  secrets 
&om being disclosed or acquired without  the consent of the person in lawful control 
of the information, in a manner contrary to honest  commercial practices. 

The  protection  of  geographical indications  and  industrial  designs  are  provided 

for by Articles  1712 and  1713 respectively. 

The  provisions  providing  for  the  enforcement  of  intellectual  property  rights 
contained  in  Articles  1714  and  1716  to  1718  and  the  specific  procedural  and 
remedial  aspects  of  c i d  and  administrative procedures  contained  in  Article  1715, 
closely  mirror  the analogous provisions in the TRIPS Agreement. Mexico is  required, 
by  an  Annex  to  Article  1718, to  introduce  border  controls of  intellectual property 
rights withm three years  of having signed NAFTA. 

Article  1719  provides  for  technical  assistance  and  technical  co-operation 

between the parties and for co-operation in eliminating trade in infringing goods. 

The  NAFTA Agreement  has  been  notified  to  the  TRIPS Council  to  take 
advantage  of  the  exemption  from  MFN treatment  extended  by  Article  4  of  the 
TRIPS Agreement to Member  nations. Article 4(d) exempts international agreements 
which  pre-date  the  TRIPS Agreement.  No  standard  form  of  notification  has  been 
prescribed.  Mexico’s  notification  of  the  NAFTA Agreement  reserves  the  right  to 
invoke  the  exemption  in  Article  4(d),  “in  respect  of  any  trade-related  aspect  of 
intellectual  property  rights  deriving  from  the  NAFTA.”49  The  U.S. notification  of 
NAFTA identifies “Article  1709, paragraph  (7)  [concerned with  the  non-protection 
of  moral  rights]  as  being  exempt  from  the  most-favoured-nation 
treatment 
obligations of the TRIP Agreement.”50 

49 
WTO Doc.  I P / N / ~ / M E x / ~  of 12 February  1996 
5”  WTo Doc. IP/N/4/UsA/1  of 29 February 1996. 

706 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

VIII. SOUTH AMERICA 

A. 

The Latin American  Free  Trade Association 

The  LAIA was  formed  by  the  merger  of  the  Andean  Pact  and  MERCOSUR to 
create the largest trade bloc  in Latin America. The MERCOSUR, (Mercado  Comun de2 
Sur),  comprises  Argentina,  Brazil,  Paraguay  and  Uruguay,  which  have  a  combined 
population  of  100.6  milhon.  The  Andean  Pact  countries  of  Bolivia,  Colombia, 
Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela, represent a  market of 98.2 million persons. One effect 
of  this  merger  is  to  associate  the  economic  strength  of  the  MEKCOSUIL with  the 
tradition  of intellectual property co-operation  between  the  countries of the  Andean 
Pact. 

B. 

The Andean Pact 

Co-operation  between  Members  of  the  Andean  Pact  on  the  subjects  of 
industrial  property  and  technology  transfer  date  back  to  the  1 9 6 0 ~ . ~ ’  This  co- 
operation  was  perceived  as  an  integral  part  to  eventual  economic  integration. 
However,  not  all  participants  in  the  Andean  group  shared  the  integrationist 
enthusiasm of Colombia and Venezuela, which together accounted for three-quarters 
of intra-Andean trade.  Some impetus was given to the integration programme by  the 
establishment of NAFTA and the  establishment of the MEKCOSUK to the  South. The 
Fifth  Andean  Presidential  Council,  held  at  Machu  Picchu,  Peru,  in  May  1991, 
agreed  to  the  advancement  of  the  Andean  integration  timetable  to  establish  a  free 
trade  zone  by  1 January  1992. Peru  and  Ecuador  resisted  this  proposal  on  “basic 
philosophic  and  macroeconomic  policy  grounds.”52 At  the  following  Presidential 
Council Meeting, held  at  Cartagena,  Colombia, in  December  1991, agreement was 
reached  in  the  Act  of  Barahona,  to  establish  the  Andean  customs  union  by  the 
following year.  Progress was  complicated  by  the  attempted  coup  d’e‘tat  in  Venezuela 
on 4  February  1992 and by  the  decision by  President  Fujimori on 5 April  1992 to 
suspend  the  Peruvian  Constitution.  This  latter  decision  was  followed  by  the 
suspension  of  diplomatic  relations  between  Venezuela  and  Peru,  causing  an 
interruption  to  the  integration  discussions withm  the  Andean  group.  This  log-jam 
was  breached by  the Andean  Commission at its Meeting of 25 August  1992, which 
adopted  Decision  32 1, temporarily  suspending  Peru’s  participation  in  the  Andean 
fi-ee trade  programme.53 By Decision  324,  the  other  four  members  of the  Andean 
Pact,  Bolivia,  Colombia,  Ecuador  and  Venezuela,  agreed  to  implement  the  Act  of 
Barahona  to  complete the  process  of establishing an  Andean  free trade  zone.54 It  is 

ch.12. 

5 1   See  M. Blakeney,  Legol  Aspects  of the  Transfer  of  Technolqy  tu  Developing  Courrtnes,  Esr, Oxford,  1989, 
52  Pate,  ifltroducfory Note to  Andean  Group Derision  283 efc.,  32 ILM  143, 1993. 
53 See  32 ILM 209,  1993. 
54  See 32 ILM  211,  1993. 

IP LAW  IN REGIONAL COMMERCIAL UNIONS 

707 

not yet clear whether the defection of Peru will weaken or strengthen the economic 
integration of the Andean region, but Peru’s departure has  enabled the group to be 
less  doctrinaire  than  it  formerly  was.  An  indication  of  this  liberalization, and  a 
reiteration  of  the  importance of  intellectual property protection  in  the  integration 
process,  was  the  adoption,  by  Decision 313, of  a  new  Andean  Common  Code  on 
Intellectual Pr~perty.’~ Ths  Code  provides for  the  collective national  adoption  of 
norm of protection. 

The Code,  containing 122 Articles, contains elements of the  subsequent TKIPS 

Agreement, although a  number of  its  provisions will  cause problems for  signatories 
which may wish to adopt TRIPS norms. For example, excluded fiom patentability by 
Article 7, are “inventions relating to pharmaceutical products contained on the ht of 
essential medicines  of  the  World  Health  Organization”. The  duration of patents  is 
provided by Article 30 to be fifteen years  fiom  the date of filing, with the possibility 
of an extension of five years for inventions being commercially exploited in Member 
countries. A comprehensive compulsory licensing code is provided in Articles 41 to 49. 
Articles  57  to  70  provide  for  the  registration of  industrial  designs.  Excluded 
&om registration by  Article  57  are designs  “relating to  clothing”  and which  would 
not be  registrable as  trade marks. Among the signs which are not registrable as trade 
marks  under  Article  72  are,  inter  alia,  signs  which  consist  of  the  packaging  of 
products, or  isolated colours, or which  consist of  “a  national or foreign geographic 
indication  that  could lead to  error with respect to  the products or services to which 
they  are  applied.”  A  system  of  trade-mark  registration is  provided  by  Article  76. 
Registration in one Andean Pact country is  conferred a six-month priority in other 
Pact countries by Article 93. 

The  Code  is  unclear  on  whether  the  Andean  group  intend  to  adopt  a 
centralized  administration of  industrial property  rights.  The  Enghsh  translation  of 
Article 121 states in this regard: 

“For  the  purpose  of  consolidating  a  collective  system  of  administration, the  Member 
countries  agree  to  assure  the  proper  application  of  the  provisions  of  this  Decision. 
Likewise they agree to strengthen, foster the autonomy of and modernize the competent 
national offices, and the information systems in  accordance with the latest te~hnology.”~‘ 
The potential  difficulty which Andean  Pact  Members may  have  in  reconciling 
their Intellectual Property Code with the TRIPS Agreement is  accommodated by  the 
notification of  the Andean Pact  to  the TRIPS Council including “regulations which 
Member countries.” ’’ 
may  have  been  or  may  in  the  future  be  adopted by  the  Andean  community or  its 

55 See 32 ILM  180. 1993 
56  Ibid., 207. 
57  WTO Doc. 1P/N/4/Bo~/l of 19 August  1997. 

‘ 

708 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

C.  The Common Market  $the  Southern  Cone 

MERCOSUR was  created  by  the  Asunci6n  Treaty  of  26  March  1991, between 
Argentina,  Brazil,  Uruguay  and  Paraguay.58  Ths  Treaty  provided  for 
the 
establishment  of  a  free  trade  zone  and  customs  union,  prefatory  to  a  more 
comprehensive integration. The institutional structure of the MERCOSUR was  settled 
by  the Protocol of Our0 Preto  of 31 December  1994.5’ The Protocol established: a 
Common  Market  Council;  a  Common  Market  Group;  a  MEKCOSUR Trade 
Commission;  a  joint  Parliamentary  Commission;  and  an  Economic  and  Social 
Consultative Forum.  This  has  been  taken  to  be  more  akin  to  the  Benelux  Treaty, 
than  to  the European Union.“)  However, the Presidential Summit held in Miami in 
December  1994, referred to  the  establishment of  a  free trade  zone  “from Alaska  to 
Tierra del Fuego” by  2005.‘* 

The  Asunci6n  Treaty  also  provided  for  the  “harmonization  of  legislation  in 
different  areas”.  Sub-Group  7  (Industrial  and  Technical  Policy)  of  MERCOSUK is 
seized  with  the  discussion  of  intellectual  property  matters  and  has  established  the 
Intellectual Property Commission to oversee their harmonization. 

In  August  1995,  in  a  meeting  at  Asundn, 

the  Intellectual  Property 
Commission formulated a  “Protocol  on the  Harmonization  of Intellectual Property 
Provisions  within  MERCOSUR concerning  Trademarks,  Indications  of  Source  and 
Appellations  of  Origin,  regarding  the  Harmonization  of  Industrial  Property  Law 
within  the  MERCOSUK Countries”.62 The  Protocol  concerned  the  harmonization 
both  of the substantive law and  administration of intellectual property rights. Article 
2  of the  Protocol requires Member  States to  implement both  the  Paris Convention 
and  the  TKIPS Agreement.  The balance  of the  Protocol recites  TRIPS requirements 
in  relation to  trade marks and  geographic names,  and provides for  the  protection  of 
plant  varieties  and  for  the  implementation of the  prohibition  of the  trade  in  pirate 
and  counterfeit goods. The signatories to  the  Protocol foreshadow the  introduction 
of similar protocols in relation to the other categories of intellectual property. 

IX.  INTELLECTUAL PKOPERTY CO-ORDINATION 

AS AN  INFRASTRUCTURE FOR 

DEVELOPMENT 
A  key  feature  of  the  intellectual  property  agenda,  particularly  of  regional 

commercial unions  in  Asia,  is  the  co-ordination  of  efforts to  implement  the  TRIPS 
Agreement.  The activities of the  United  States Trade  Representative under  S. 301 
of the U.S. Trade Act, in placing nations with  deficient intellectual property regimes 

63 

58  The Treaty of Asunci6n is reproduced in 30 ILM  1044, 1991. 
59  See 34 ILM  1244, 1995. 
‘’  Supra,  footnote 9, at  1245. 
Alhadeff, supra,  footnote 9. 
62 D.  O’Connor, Harmonization .f Industrial  Property in M ~ ~ c o a t i x ,  Trademark World 33, April  1996 
63 

See Blakeney, supra,  footnote 29. 

IP  LAW  IN  REGIONAL COMMEKCIAL UNIONS 

709 

on  “Watch Lists”,  prefatory  to  the  imposition of  trade  sanctions,  made  intellectual 
property  an  international trade  issue.64 Not  only  were  sanctions  a  consequence of 
inadequacies in intellectual property laws  and the  enforcement of those laws, but  the 
adequacy of intellectual property arrangements became regarded  as  a  prerequisite for 
Western foreign investment. In the  absence of the  effective protection of proprietary 
technologies, transfers  of technology would be unlikely.  Given the perceived primacy 
of  technology transfer  in  economic  development, nations  and  regional  commercial 
unions  reliant  on  the  acquisition  of  foreign  technologies  were  obliged  to  provide 
effective demonstrations of  respect for  intellectual property rights.  Compliance with 
the  TRIPS Agreement  is  a  convenient, and,  for  U.S.  investors, an  authoritative way 
of  demonstrating respect  for  intellectual  property  rights.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
TRIPS’ compliance  is  repeatedly  affirmed  as  a  minimum  standard  for  intellectual 
property protection  in  countries which  hitherto  expressed the view  that  intellectual 
property rights were a means of perpetuating colonial overlordship. 

Because  of  the  importance  of  regional  commercial  unions  as  participants  in 
global  tradmg  arrangements  and  as  means  of  aggregating the  economic  power  of 
individual  nations  which  would  otherwise  be  insignificant  actors,  ensuring TRIPS’ 
compliance has  become part  of the discipline of  regional commercial associations. In 
this  way  intellectual  property  laws  continue  to  play  a  key  role  in  the  process  of 
economic  development-at 
least  at  the  symbolic  level.  If  the  equation  between 
intellectual property  protection,  technology acquisition and  economic  development 
is  more  than  symbolic,  then  the  regional  co-ordination  of  intellectual  property 
compliance will effectively  promote regional economic development. 

64  See M. Blakeney, lnteNectual Property  in  World Trude,  I  International Trade Law  & Regulation 76,  1995. 


