Liberalization of Antitrust Rules for IP Licensing 

Global Trends and  Unresolved Issues 

Joel DAVIDOW* 

BACKGROUND 

During the 1970s, international licensors of intellectual property (IP) often found 
themselves in a regulatory straitjacket. Japan and major developing countries required 
notification  of  all  inward-bound  licences,  and  deleted  all  clauses  deemed  to  be 
objectionable. The EU made notification almost mandatory by means of rules denying 
a non-notifier the right to defend a restriction after the fact, and exposing a non-notifier 
to fines that would not be imposed if the licence had been submitted at the outset. The 
United  States, whde not requiring notification of licences, emulated the above parties 
in  promulgating  lists  of  licensing  practices  that  would  be  treated  as  prima  facie 
unacceptable. The Antitrust  Division’s list  of suspect practices was  called  the  “Nine 
No-Nos”.  The Division created a patent section with a mandate to bring test  cases in 
the  licensing area, which  it  did, resulting in  some victories  or settlements based  on 
prosecutorial theories that are no longer used. 

In Japan and the EU, lists of licensing clauses were created, defining groups of them 
as  “black  listed”,  “grey listed”  or  “white listed”.  No  defence for  lack  of significant 
market share was recognized. A number of the grey-list  clauses would not have raised 
antitrust issues under U.S. law. 

In  many  developing  countries,  such  as  Mexico,  Brazil,  Argentina  and  India, 
virtually any restriction on a local licensee, even if it were the licensor’s own subsidiary, 
could be struck down if found to be unfavourable to national development interests or 
unfair  to  local licensees.’  In  an  effort  to  codifjr  their  approach, the  developing and 
least-developed countries (LDCS) asked the United  Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development  (UNCTAD) to  promulgate  a  “Code  of  Conduct  for  the  Transfer  of 
Technology  to  Developing  Countries”  (TOT Code)  that,  if  adopted  as  originally 
proposed, would  have condemned  forty types  of licence restrictions-virtually 
every 
one that those countries had ever heard of. 

*  Partner, Kile, Goekjian, Reed & McManus, Washington, D.C. 

As  chief of the Foreign Commerce Section of the Antitrust Division, the author served as a negotiator of 
the UN Set of Principles for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices and of the UNCTAD Conference on a 
Transfer of Technology Code. He is the author of Foreign Antitrust Rulesfor Patent Licenses in each edition of Drafting 
License Agreements, Aspen Press, third edition, 2002. 

The author may be contactd at: cjdavidow@kgrmlaw.com). 
See Joel Davidow, The United States,  Developing Countries and the Issue of Intra-Enterprise Agreementr, 7 GA. 

J. of Int’l & Comparative Law 507, 1977. 

492 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

There were a substantial number  of theoretical and practical objections to patent 
licence/antitrust  systems  based  on  the  listing  of  suspect  practices  and  requiring  (or 
impelling)  their  notification  and  review.  First,  the  licensed  patent,  process  or 
improvement  might  simply be  of little  market  significance, so that  there  is  no likely 
competitive  harm  regardless  of  the  type  of  restriction  imposed.  For  instance,  if  a 
company obtained a patent on a cigarette lighter that works on methane and looks like 
a crocodile, consumers would probably be indifferent to whether the licensing of such 
device includes price fixing, restrictions on research, tying of methane purchases to the 
device,  exclusive grant-back  of improvements,  etc.  There are  simply so  many  other 
ways to light cigarettes, many of them very cheap, that the danger of substantial effect 
on the economy is nil. This problem is now handled in some Guidelines by the creation 
of “safe harbors”: pre-clearing  firms or devices with low market shares.2 But it remains 
to be seen whether all parties involved will perceive market parameters in the same way. 
Second,  various  adrmnistrative  or  bureaucratic  inefficiencies  were  inherent  in 
licence review. In the EU, whenever the licence did not fit exactly within a white-list 
exemption,  the  company  would  have  to  re-write  it,  live  with  the  risk  of  later 
invalidation  or seek a formal clearance, which could take three or four years to obtain, 
sometinies after considerable expense.  In Japan,  clearance of a licence agreement  was 
largely a dialogue between the Japanese licensee and the Japan Fair Trade Commission 
(JFTc),  with the licensor having no official role or right to appeal. Moreover, the timing 
and circumstances often meant that the revision of the licence  changed the economics 
in favour of the licensee, with there being no practical way of re-negotiating  the royalty 
or adding balancing provisions. 

Lastly, much  of the practice  of listing suspect provisions  and  conducting  licence 
review was infected by  fairness or national  development  considerations  that were  not 
necessarily identical  with  competition  or efficiency analysis.  For  instance,  provisions 
requiring  the  licensee  to  grant  back  improvement  patents  were  more  likely  to  be 
accepted  if  the  licensor  granted-forward  similar rights.  Such  approach  has  a  certain 
attractive symmetry but may make little  sense in competition  terms,  or even fairness 
terms. For instance, if the licensor has two hundred researchers and the licensee has one 
researcher, is it truly “fair” to require licensors to provide improvements royalty free? If 
third  parties  could  benefit  competitively  from  licences,  surely a  reciprocal  exclusive 
grant-back and grant-forward  is twice as bad for rivals as one or the other would be? If 
a licensor takes on a risky distributor, why should an agreement which provides that if 
the distributor does badly and the licence is transferred to another the original dealer will 
not  continue  selling the  product,  not  be  honoured?  But Japan  and  the EU  express 
suspicion about restrictions which last longer than the end of the licence. 

2  See, e.g., United States Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission, Antitrust  Guidelinesfor  the 
Licensing  oflutellecttral Property, 4 Trade Reg. Rep. (CCH) 13, 132 at 20, 733, 1995: 20 percent market share is safety 
zone (74.3). 

LIBERALIZATION OF ANTITRUST RULES 

493 

Starting in about 1980, there has been an intellectual and political counter attack 
which has been very substantially successful. Most developing countries have abandoned 
technology  screening,  along  with  investment  screening.  Many  have  adopted  a 
Western-style antitrust law under which an attack on a licence agreement would require 
a detailed complaint and a substantial amount of proof of market effect.3 

In  1980,  while  the  TOT Code  exercise  was  fakng,  the  United  Nations 
unanimously  adopted  a  voluntary  antitrust  code,  and  UNCTAD developed  a  model 
antitrust  law  and  antitrust  technical  assistance  programme.4  After  1985,  this 
technological assistance was frequently sought. After the fall of Soviet-bloc communism 
in  1989, there  was  a  greater  shift  toward policies  of  deregulation, privatization  and 
adoption of antitrust laws. In 1970, approximately thirty countries had an antitrust law. 
By 2000, almost one hundred countries had such a law, many of which had opened up 
to foreign investment and deregulated many sectors. 

The negotiation of the proposed TOT Code was  stalemated and the project was 
abandoned. Instead, the developing countries accepted the TRIPS Agreement which was 
highly favourable to patent owners, requiring phased adoption of IP laws by developing 
countries and provision of extensive remedies against  infringement. In trade for such 
concession, the technology-dependent countries settled merely for a  short passage  in 
TRIPS stating that antitrust regulation of licences is legitimate, and that practices such as 
tying may legitimately be reviewed and remedied. 

I.  AMERICA MOVES FIRST AND LEADS REFORM 

In  the  late  1970s  and  early  1980s,  U.S.  antitrust  agencies  abandoned  the 
Nine-No-Nos  approach, concluding that patents seldom confer real monopoly power 
and that  most patent licence clauses  need to be  examined in terms of actual purpose, 
effect  and market context rather than in terms of whether they can be characterized as 
involving a provision that has been found competitively dangerous in some situations. 
In  1995, the U.S. agencies promulgated new IP Guidelines that stressed the need 
for  full-scale  analysis  rather  than  mere  labelling, and  that  declared  that  licensing is 
generally pro-competitive and that most licence conditions perform useful economic 
functions. The Guidelines also set out a 20 percent market-share safe harbor. This meant 
that U.S. agencies were unlikely to investigate or challenge licences between firms with 
minor market shares. Nevertheless, the U.S. agencies continued to bring enforcement 
actions in this area, such as one against a General Electric (GE) medical device licence 
that  prevented  hospital  licensees  from  entering  the  service  field  where  GE  was 
becoming dominant. The case was settled when GE agreed to delete the restriction. 

World: Crisis, Coerrion and  Choice, 49 International Organization 1, 1995. 

These trends are chronicled in Susan K.  Sell, lntellectttal  Property  Protection  and  Antitrust  in  the  Developing 
4  See Debra L. Miller and Joel Davidow, Antitrust at  the United Nations: A  Tale of Two Codes, 18 Stan J. of 

Int’l Law 347, 1982. 

494 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

11.  LIBERALIZATION 

IN JAPAN OCCURS IN STAGES 

In response to US. criticism, Japan modified its scheme of patent licence review in 
1989, then abandoned it in  1997, replacing it in  1999 with IP Guidelines very similar 
to those published by the U.S. agencies.5 

The new JFTC Guidelines contain four sections: 
- 
- 

an introduction, setting forth the purpose and applicabdity of the Guidelines; 
the JFTC’s views on the relationship between patent licensing agreements and 
$,  23 of Japan’s Antimonopoly Act; 
the JFTC’S views on the patent or know-how  licensing agreements fiom the 
perspective of unreasonable restraint of trade and private monopolization; and 
the JFTC’S views on the patent or know-how  licensing agreements from the 
perspective of unfair trade practices. 

- 

- 

In particular, the new JFTC Guidelines used text  and examples, not mere lists, to 
explicate agency policy. The new Guidelines stated that restrictions would be deemed 
reasonable or not,  based  on  market  share and  effect  on competition  rather  than  on 
fairness considerations or on a per se basis. Further, theJFTC has created a business-review 
clearance procedure under which it will opine on licence arrangements submitted by 
domestic or foreign firms. 

The new  Guidelines treat price or re-sale  price restrictions on licensees as almost 
always  objectionable.  Unlike  the  United  States, Japan  condemns  maximum-price 
clauses  as  well  as  minimum  ones.  The Japanese Guidelines  condemn  restrictions on 
research  by  the licensee, an item that has  appeared in EU and U.S.  cases and  merger 
reviews. Japan also condemns exclusive grant-back clauses on improvements, a stricter 
position than in the EU or the United  States. 

The  new  Guidelines,  like  those  of  the  United  States,  but  unlike  Japan’s  old 
licensing Guidelines, concentrate much  attention  on  issues  of licensing by  dominant 
syndicates  or  dominant  firms.  It  is  stated that  pooling  of patents  to  achieve market 
allocation is unacceptable. It is warned that pooled patents may be subject to compulsory 
licensing  as  an  antimonopoly  remedy.  Patent  tying  or  package  licensing  by  a 
market-dominating firm is stated to be probably illegal. 

Carehl study of the JFTC IP Guidelines reveals  that,  although Japan  has  moved 
much closer to  U.S.  analysis and positions, there  are instances in which  the Japanese 
approach is significantly hfferent.  In a few cases, it appears that the variance may simply 
be based on a misunderstanding of US. precedent or inability to handle it in the same 

5  The  sequential  changes in Japanese  antitrust  treatment .of technology licences are  discussed in  detail in 

Joshua A. Newberg,  Technology Licensing UnderJapanese  Antitrust LAW,  32 Law & Policy in Int’l Bus. 705, 2001. 

LIBERALIZATION OF ANTITRUST RULES 

495 

way in the context of their legal system. In others, the motivating force appears to be a 
greater  concern  with  fairness  than  with  competition  theory  as  such.  The  JFTC 
Guidelines, at  Section 2B(b), state that  the  use  of a  no-contest  clause  is  probably an 
Antimonopoly  Act  violation.  In  the  United  States,  such  clause  would  at  most  be 
unenforceable. 

A  simdar  confusion  occurs with  regard  to  the  issue  of royalties,  which  can  be 
collected for an unduly long period. In Bmlotte v .  Thys,6 the U.S. Supreme Court held 
that  it  is  a  misuse  of  a patent  to  insist  on  royalties being  paid  after  it  has  expired. 
However,  later  cases  make  clear  that  such  clauses  or  collections  are  not  antitrust 
violations.  Nevertheless,  the JFTC  Guidelines treat  a  Bmlotte  violation  as  a  probable 
antitrust  violation unless justified  as  part  of an  instalment payment  plan.  The more 
extreme divergence in this area deals with know-how  licensors who enforce a contract 
in  order to  collect royalties or know-how  that  has  come into the public domain for 
reasons that are not  the fault of the licensee. The U.S. Supreme Court, in Aronsen  v .  
Quickpoint  Pencil  C O . , ~  held  that  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  such  a  clause  or  its 
enforcement, that the licensee bargains for a head start over potential rivals and must pay 
for his bargain even when the advantage turns out to be short-lived. The antitrust logic 
of the Aronsen decision is made clear by the facts of that case. There, half-a-dozen  new 
competitors had entered the market and the royalty was only 2 percent. Thus, it is nearly 
impossible  to  see  why  collection  of  the  royalty  had  any  antitrust  significance. 
Nevertheless, the JFTC Guidelines announce the opposite of the Aronsen rule, namely 
that it is probably an antitrust violation for a licensor to insist on being paid for know- 
how that has become public. It can be noted that the EU rule for some years was the 
same as the one the Japanese have now revived, namely that collecting such royalties is 
at least a suspect practice.8 

Although the new Japanese licensing Guidelines generally follow the substantive 
approach of the U.S. Guidelines, there are a few variations, most of which reflect the 
earlier Japanese approach that licensors generally have stronger bargaining positions than 
licensees and that it is a proper function of competition law to redress such bargaining 
imbalance when it is “abused”. The Guidelines refer to abuse of a “dominant bargaining 
position” as  being a  cognizable offence under  the Japanese Antimonopoly Act. With 
regard to the particular issue of grant-backs,  the 1999 Guidelines state that a one-way 
exclusive  grant-back  may  be  acceptable  if  there  is  adequate  compensation  to  the 
licensee. This approach has no counterpart in US. antitrust law, and goes even a bit 
further than EU competition law on the same subject. The approach does not stand up 
well  under  competition-law  analysis.  If  exclusive  grant-backs  are  dangerous  to  the 
public because  the licensor may  use  them  to  dominate a  technology market, then  it 
makes no competition-law sense to excuse such amassing of technology rights as long 

6  379 US. 29 (1964). 
’ 440 U.S. 257 (1979). 
8  See Article 3(5) of the Know-How Group Exemption, Regulation 556/89 (now defunct) 

496 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

as the licensor pays a lot for such rights. Economic theory would suggest that the greater 
the market power being obtained, the more the monopolist will pay. 

The Japanese Guidelines differ from US. antitrust rules in a number of other specific 
ways. One example is that the Guidelines indicate that requiring a licensee to promise not 
to challenge the vahdity of a patent may  constitute a violation of Japan's Antimonopoly 
Act.  The  U.S.  Supreme  Court  held  in  Lear  v .  Adkins,  Inc.,9  that  a  covenant  not  to 
challenge  validty  is  against  public policy and therefore unenforceable. However, U.S. 
courts have held that imposing such a covenant is not an antitrust violation in itself.10 Thus, 
it appears that a company licensing in or into Japan could expose itselfto antitrust penalties 
for imposing such covenant, but not in the United States. This appears to be an instance 
in whch Japan attempted to follow the US. rule but ignored a  subtle distinction and 
ended up with a tougher rule than the Americans impose. 

111.  REFORM IN THE EU: ACTION AND PENDING  PROPOSALS 

The EU has liberalized both its procedural requirements and its substantive rules. 

A.  Procedural Liberalization 

The  EU  has  never  formally  required  the  notification  of  licence  agreements. 
Nevertheless, for a long time its system as a whole created a very strong impetus for the 
notification of many agreements or for the avoidance of licence provisions that would 
have  created  grounds  for  notification.  Some  of  the  rules  creating  pressures  for 
notification have already been changed. It now appears likely that many others will be 
abandoned or loosened. First, Article 81(2) of the current EU Treaty provides  (as did 
old  Article  85(2))  that  restrictions  of  EU  competition  are  void.  Thus,  a  licence 
containing a  grey-list  or  black-list  restriction  could  be  deemed  void,  thus  perhaps 
releasing a  licensee from the  restriction, voidmg the  whole  licence, or  exposing the 
licensor to a  fine. Under  the  old system, the  EU Commission would  not  consider a 
restriction under old Article 85(3) (now Article 81 (3)) if the licensor needed it only after 
an issue arose with regard to a non-notified agreement. Second, it was a tenet ofEU law 
that only the Commission could find that a restriction was justifiable on policy grounds. 
A national court would possess no such power. 

The  system has  changed and  is  changing further.  The Commission has  already 
abandoned its refusal to consider justifications for restrictions that were not notified at 
the  outset.  Moreover,  in  regard  to  distribution  restrictions,  the  Commission  has 
published a policy paper proposing to reverse the old system and allow national courts 
to  deal with  Article  81(3) arguments for  the  legality  of  a  restrictive provision.  The 
Commission adopted the same policy for licence agreements early in 2004. 

395 U.S. 693 (1969). 

lo  Panther Pumps  G Equip. Co. v. Hydrocraft, Xu., 468 F 2d 225,232 (7th Cir. 1972) 

LIBERALIZATION OF ANTITRUST RULES 

497 

The EU’s IP  licence  Guidelines (“technology-transfer group  exemption”) were 
partially  modernized  in  1996. The  changes made  at  that  time  included  extending 
coverage  to  mixed  patent  know-how  licences,  decreasing the  number  of  grey-  or 
black-listed items and creating a fast-track system for obtaining a comfort-letter  sort of 
clearance  on  particular  licence  provisions  or  schemes.  The  group  exemption  was 
supposed to be re-examined  in 2006, but it has become an anomaly in light of other 
changes, and has been substantially altered in May 2004. 

Since the EU has largely eliminated the group-exemption approach and clearance 
approach with regard to many fields, such as distribution restraints, it became clear that 
a  parallel  change  had  to  be  made  with  regard  to  the  technology-transfer  group 
exemption, and this is now happening. 
B .  Substantive Liberalization 

In a paper re-evaluating  its “block exemption” on IP licensing, the EU indicated 
that its current black and grey lists were too strict and mechanical. Indicating the kind 
of changes it would make, the Commission dmussed a number of controversial grey- 
list and black-list items of the past  which should be treated more liberally. Thus, in a 
new Regulation which was scheduled for early 2004, the competition agency made the 
following changes: 

- 

-  stated that output or quantity restrictions in licences may be efficiency-enhancing 
and site licences may be acceptable even when they have a tendency to restrain 
output; 
covenants not  to  compete in licences may  be acceptable between firms that 
were not competitors prior to the licence; 
tymg clauses in licences are exempted where less than 30 percent of the market 
is affected; 
non-reciprocal  grant-backs  and  certain  exclusive  grant-backs  can  “benefit 
ti-om a block exemption”. 

- 

- 

Iv.  REFORM IN LDCS 

Between 1965 and 1975, many developing countries and LDCS experimented with 
a policy of restricting foreign &rect investment or condtioning it in detailed ways. Such 
regimes often included a required registration of licence agreements between a foreign 
corporation and a  local one, even if the licensee was  a subsidiary of the licensor. Not 
only did these regimes sometimes limit the amount of royalties to be paid and even the 
export  of  royalties,  they  created lists  of  licence  restrictions which  were  viewed  as 
unfavourable to the licensee or other national interest, and were thus often modified or 
expunged by a local official. As noted above, the high point of this movement occurred 

498 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

in  the  late  1970s when  those  countries, acting as  a  political group  within  the  UN, 
attempted to secure international approval of a “transfer of technology code of conduct” 
containing  forty  or  so  licence  restrictions  that  were  to  be  declared  presumptively 
unlawful by the international community. The proposed code was debated for five years 
but was never agreed upon. By the early  1980s, an era of investment deregulation and 
investment attraction began to sweep the developing world. New governments in many 
developing countries concluded that  anti-investment  policies had  been  self-defeating 
and that liberalization was the more advantageous policy. 

The trends just dscussed can be traced in LDC after LDC.  In Argentina, technology- 
transfer contracts were often screened. However,  it was reported that by  1993, “apart 
from the restrictions set out in Argentina’s antitrust law, there are no restrictive clauses 
that  are  not  allowed  to  be  included  in  technology-transfer  agreements,  whether 
between dependent or independent parties.”ll 

In Brazil,  “rules issued  in  February  1991 streamlined procedures, reduced  INPI 
interference in contract terms and permitted licensors to maintain control of technology 
after contract expires.”12 

In Mexico,  a  strict screening requirement  was  instituted in  1973. The law was 
substantidy liberalized in 1982. The system was hlly repealed in 1993 when investment 
was liberalized and an antitrust regime was put into effect.13 

The  Indian  government  announced  in July  1991 that  much  of  the  system  of 
business licences and restrictions would be abolished. However, contracts that bid the 
licensee to make tie-in  purchases are ~r0hibited.l~ 

V. 

ISSUES FOR POSSIBLE FUTURE RECONSIDERATION 

One  type  of licensing restriction-price 

is  widely  disfavoured, 
appears entitled to a good bit ofliberalization. U.S., Japanese and EU Guidelines all state 
in similar terms that attempts by a licensor to control the re-sale  or sale prices of one or 
more licensees are very likely to be challenged and sanctioned. On the other hand, there 
are at least three situations in which it would be good law and policy to be more tolerant 
of price clauses. 

clauses-which 

First, the legahty of licence clauses  setting maximum prices needs to be clarified. 
The  U.S.  Supreme  Court  has  ruled,  in  State  Oil  v .  Khan,I5  that  it  is  a  mistake  to 
condemn maximum-price  futing and treat  it  as  being  illegal per se.  The Khan  ruling 
occurred more than one year after the 1995 publication of the U.S. IP Guidelines. Thus, 

11  Thomas J. Ehrbar, Buiness International’s Guide to Intevnational Licensing, 1993, p. 11. 
12  Ibid., at 24. 
13  See ibid., p. 9, at 38; Oscar M. Becereil, Mexico’s New Law Liberalizes Technology  Transfer, Les Nouvelles, 
’ 4   Ibid., at 155-56 
15  522 U.S. 3 (1997). 

March 1992. 

LIBERALIZATION OF ANTITRUST RULES 

499 

it may be that the next version of those Guidelines wdl reflect this change in U.S. law. 
There were strong indications of this in a speech by the U.S. Antitrust Chief when he 
referred to the agencies’ position “that it is per se illegal for a patentee to fur the minimtrm 
re-sale  price for a good that has been fully sold to retailers” (emphasis added).16 There 
appears to be no reason why maximum-price furing would be any more undesirable in 
IP licensing than in product distribution arrangements, and there may even be reasons 
why setting such maximums is even more justifiable in the IP context, since these are 
often legal monopolies. 

The  EU  issued  new  vertical  Guidelines  in  1999.  It  stated  that  they  would  be 
applicable  to mixed-dstribution licensing transactions where the non-licensing purpose 
was primary. In those Guidelines, the EU took the position that the setting of maximum 
prices is generally unobjectionable. Implementation of those Guidelines means that at least 
some licence agreements in  or  to  Europe can  already  contain maximum-price-setting 
clauses that are legal. There does not seem to be a logical reason  why maximum-price 
setting in a pure licence agreement would be any more objectionable than in a mixed 
situation such  as  franchising or  distribution. The  new  version  of  the  E U s  licensing 
Guidelines  authorizes  the  setting of  maximum  prices  in  vertical licences, but  not  in 
licences from one competitor to another. 

Second, it appears to be that most antitrust agencies around the world treat price 
restrictions  on  re-sale  of  patented  products  the  same  as  price  restrictions  on  the 
manufacture  and first-sale  of patented products. Clearly, if the  rationale for  treating 
minimum-price setting in patent licences involving the right to re-sell  patented products 
is based on the general ban on minimum re-sale price maintenance, then there is no such 
basis  for  harsh  treatment  of price  restrictions in  situations where  the  licensee itself 
manufactures the product and does not act as a re-seller. 

Third, although the U.S. IP Guidelines pay lip service to the 1926 General Electric 
ruling that price setting is legal in a licence from the patent holder to a single licensee, 
their  implication  is  that  they  do  not  really  agree  with  the  General  Electric  rule  and 
mention it only because it has never been expressly overruled. In Japan and the EU, the 
IP  Guidelines do  not  indicate any  difference between  the  rules disfavouring licence 
clauses governing the pricing of a single licensee as compared to clauses governing the 
pricing of multiple licensees in  the  same  market.  Nevertheless, all  three jurisdictions 
recognize that a licensor has a full right to grant an exclusive licence and to promise not 
to compete with its licensee. 

Where a licensor has legally created a technology monopoly licensee, it should be 
a  matter of competition policy indifference whether  the prices of the product in  the 
technology-monopolized  market  are  set  by  the  licensor  or  by  the  licensee.  Some 

16  See  Antitrust  and  Intellectual  Property,  address  by  R.  Hewitt  Pate,  Acting  Assistant  Attorney  General, 

Antitrust Division, January 2003. 

500 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

developing countries, or nationalistic ones, may prefer that the local party set the price, 
but there is no economic reason to predict that  a licensee with market power will set 
lower prices than an offshore licensor. Thus, there is no consumer interest in prohibiting 
licensee imposition of sale or re-sale  prices of a licensee which faces no competition. 

CONCLUSION 

Clearly, there is widespread international acceptance now of the twin notions that 
IP rights should be respected and that licensing is useful and pro-competitive.  Further, 
the  red  tape  of  notification  and  black-list/grey-list  observance  has  largely  been 
eliminated globally. What remains is to think through a few more dubious doctrines and 
to harmonize  and strengthen  prosecutorial  strategies regarding  serious cases of cartels 
masquerading as licence or cross-licence agreements. 


