The  (2015) Vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 165–195

doi: 10.1111/jwip.12039

Breeding Apples for Oranges: Africa’s Misplaced
Priority Over Plant Breeders Rights

Chidi Oguamanam
University of Ottawa,

In 2000, African countries expressed reservation over the adoption of UPOV Act of 1991 as a model of plant breeders’
rights (PBRs) for TRIPS-compliance. For the continent, an acceptable system of PBRs protection would include the
protection of the rights of communities and associated indigenous knowledge, innovations, technologies and farming
practices. One and half decades after, Africa has virtually reversed itself and embraced the UPOV-PBRs system
notwithstanding the latter's narrow focus on breeders and marginal reference to farmers. This Article critically
explores the concerted sites of pressures, especially free trade and economic partnership agreements, and related
policies through which Africa appears to have capitulated and upturned its policy position on PBRs. The continent's
present priority over the implementation of PBRs through various regional and national legal initiatives currently at
the instance of African Intellectual Property Organization (OAPI), the African Regional Intellectual Property
Organization (ARIPO), the Southern African Economic Community (SADC) and speciﬁc country initiatives are
explored. The article highlights the basis for the incongruity of Africa's newfound interest in the UPOV-PBRs
system—a regime not designed for the farmer-centered tenor of African agriculture. It calls attention to the continued
relevance of Africa's 2000 Model Law, especially as it applies to PBRs and recommends reality assessment as an
important step toward the formulation of IPRs system suited for stakeholders in African agriculture for the continent's
food security and food sovereignty.

Keywords African union; plant breers’ rights; food security; farmers’ rights

In developing countries, especially in sub-Sahara Africa, small scale indigenous and local community
(ILC) farmers produce an estimated 80% of the food (IFAD/UNEP, 2013, p. 10). In essence, they feed a
signiﬁcant percentage of the global population. More than 90% of seeds used by these ILC farmers are
sourced from among themselves through traditional and informal seed exchange and sharing practices
(Borowiak, 2004, p. 525). By various statistical accounts, farming and rural populations in those
countries account for over 60% (World Bank, 2015) of the entire population. But that farmer-
population ratio stands in sharp contrast to the situation in the world's industrialized and afﬂuent
countries symbolically uniﬁed in their membership of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD). The latter comprises mostly European Union (EU) member states, the United
States, Canada and a few industrialized countries.1 Most of the OECD countries have continued to
witness radical decline in their farming populations. Notably, in the United States, Canada and
Australia, the farming populations have fallen from well over 60% in the 1900s. Today, they stand at an
average of 1% (Bello, 2009, p. 90).2

Multiple factors explain the decline in the farming populations in afﬂuent regions of the world. First, it
reﬂects a universal trend in global rural-urban drift, which is also part of the experience in developing
countries albeit on a lower scale. Second, the decline mirrors the ageing of farming populations and lack of
interest in farming by the younger generation (J€ohr, 2012).3 Third, it is a factor of interrelated dynamics of
mechanization, capitalization and corporatization of farming and its transformation into industrial
agriculture, whereof machines and various form of technological applications constitute viable substitute
for labour in agricultural production (Bello, 2009; Manning, 2004).

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

165


