The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4, pp. 168–188

doi: 10.1002/jwip.12011

On Legal Validity – Using the Work of Patent Courts
for Quality Management

The Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub
European Patent Ofﬁce

The patent courts of the world’s leading patent systems annually pass judgment in more than 12,000 cases originating
from decisions made at ﬁrst instance. These judgments constitute a statistically signiﬁcant resource of ﬁnal opinions
relating to the quality of the work of the legal authorities, but one that has so far not been systematically exploited by
the patent ofﬁces. This paper shows, for the ﬁrst time, a way to provide objective and cost-efﬁcient metrics for the
work of patent ofﬁces and patent attorney professionals. Accordingly, the following key conclusions are developed in
this paper:

Patent case law is sufﬁciently representative and suitable for statistical analysis of ﬁrst instance decisions;
The current academic approaches to legal validity analysis of patent court decisions seem not sufﬁciently transparent
for the application in patent and trademark ofﬁce operative quality systems;
The legal remedies of refusal and opposition appeal can be modeled;
Legal validity and the harmonization level of a patent system are measurable;
The legal validity of European Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) refusal decisions appears to be comparatively higher than the
validity of opposition decisions in view of the EPO Boards of Appeal;
The analysis methodology for the EPO is fully transferable to the worldwide relevant patent systems whilst retaining
their national legal autonomy;
The new EU Patent: there will be a degree of competition between EU patent revocation procedure and the EPO
opposition procedure. In future, it will be necessary to evaluate also the quality of the EU Patent Court of First
Instance.

Keywords European Patent Ofﬁce; international patent ofﬁces; executive instance; patent courts; econometric
measurement of legal validity; patent quality

Introduction

Over the past ten years, the subject of quality has gained a lot of momentum in discussions among the
leading patent ofﬁces. In 2003, the UK IPO and later on a number of smaller patent ofﬁces have received
the ISO 9001 certiﬁcation1 for the quality management of important core processes, and also the European
Patent Ofﬁce (EPO) strives towards certiﬁcation in the near future. The issue of quality is now high on the
agendas of most patent and trademark ofﬁces (PTOs) worldwide. With respect to international,
multilateral cooperation it should, however, be noted that the PTOs are currently compared with each
other only in procedural terms and that they aim only to establish procedural cooperation agendas. The
authorities still do not recognize or compare the quality of each others’ patent products (with emphasize on
the principle of territoriality). Despite this, most of the ofﬁces maintain internal product-speciﬁc audits
which provide statistics about the quality of the patent grant decisions and even the thoroughness of the
patent searches (Scellato et al., 2011). These quality assurance statistics are usually treated conﬁdentially
and are not used for international comparative purposes.

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

Although it makes use of sophisticated measures and despite its high-quality reputation among its
users (Wild and Clover, 2010), the EPO is sometimes subject to criticism from both political interest
groups and private entities. Within a European context, the EPO is, in a way, engaging in de facto
competition with national patent ofﬁces. As an example, the German Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce
(DPMA) provides quasi identical patent products and offers the same kind of legal recourse to the German
patent court (BPatGer) for these products. Both ofﬁces offer an opposition procedure which is open for
appeal, and also in the case of a refusal, both ofﬁces offer the possibility of appeals. Thus, the EPO Boards
of Appeal2 (BoA) are engaged in making decisions every year on around 2,0003 cases (EPO Boards of
Appeal, 2012, p. 3) and the BPatGer on 600 cases (German Bundespatentgericht, 2011, p. 82) regarding
the legal validity of the ﬁrst instance’s4 work.

It is thus remarkable that, so far, nobody has systematically included the work of the patent courts in a
statistical legal validity evaluation in the context of the PTOs’ quality assurance systems. On the other
hand, legal scholars do show less reluctance to carry out comparative legal validity analysis. Most of them
apply correlation techniques usually based on bibliographic data (Harhoff and Reitzig, 2004, pp. 443–80).
This is a very efﬁcient means to gain formal—but not legal—information. I do, however, not recommend
this approach for the purpose of empiric legal validity analysis; and I am aware of only two publications
that investigate the degree of validity of litigated US—but not European—patents making use of empiric
techniques to a larger extent. Allison and Lemley (1998, p. 185) analyzed 300 patent validity decisions
from District or Federal Circuit courts reported in the period from 1989 to 1996. They admitted, however,
that it proved difﬁcult to convert a written decision into concrete numbers. Furthermore, they did not
disclose whether, and to what degree, they used a systematic/harmonized technique for the extraction of
data on legal validity from the decision texts. One recent paper by McEldowney (2006) investigates the
application of novelty versus obviousness objections in more depth; but McEldowney also does not reveal
how and to what degree he has mastered the difﬁculties of comparative case law analysis.

Since there is obviously still a need to establish a common standard for the comparison of ﬁrst and
second instance legal teachings in patent law, a methodology for comparative legal validity analysis is
proposed in this paper. I have tested and optimized the approach while working as a project manager at the
EPO, based on analysis of 2,300 appeal decisions from seven annual cohorts. An appeal is regarded as a
judicial procedure, and the BoA are often referred to as courts.5 Thus, for the ﬁrst time it was possible to
provide a statistical representation of the level of harmonization between the whole annual body of EPO
judicial and executive instance decisions. This paper provides for a summary of the applied methodology
and explains the practical use of the developed legal validity indicators. It is intended to stimulate interest
in systematic legal validity analysis based on patent court decisions—an important statistical resource
which has so far not been systematically exploited by the patent ofﬁces. Finally, the underlying thesis of
this paper is that the applied legal theories and principles can be used effectively also for comparative legal
validity studies within the Chinese, German, Japanese, Korean and US patent systems. Whereas the
substantive patent law among these countries cannot be directly compared, the legal recourses in the
respective systems can well be mapped and the ﬁrst and second instances’ decisions comparatively
analyzed based on the analysis model introduced in Section 2 of this paper.

Scope and Restrictions
This article provides a self-contained overview of a methodology which I have developed. It is intended to
address solutions to previously unsolved or undescribed challenges with respect to the systematic
comparative analysis of appealed decisions of PTOs (namely grants and revocations of patents after
opposition/reexamination/trial and refusals/rejections of patent applications). It is believed that patent
professionals around the world who are looking for quality metrics complementary to the existing quality
audit systems will beneﬁt from the teaching of this paper which presents an extraction of basic ideas and

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

169

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

applications as developed in my book.6 It is likewise intended to provide legal and economic scholars with
information gained from comparative case law legal validity analysis on a large scale.

Some issues can only be dealt with in passing here. In particular, the detailed legal and procedural
considerations for carrying out the methodology cannot be dealt with in the framework of a journal paper.
Likewise, a more detailed individual comparison and applicability assessment with respect to the German,
US, Japanese, Korean and Chinese legal systems is provided in the book. The important aspect of selection
effects with respect to appeals before patent courts and boards is taken into account here, even though
statistical aspects are not the main focus of this paper.

1. Patent Case Law is Sufficiently Representative and Suitable for Statistical Analysis of

First Instance Decisions

In particular at the PTOs, there exists a widespread perception that because each decision of a BoA refers
to a unique case, and because the boards have to construe the law according to the merits of each individual
case, case law is not suitable for statistical validity assessment. According to this logic, one single case
cannot be representative of a full population of refusals/rejections or opposition/re-examination/trial
cases.

Bearing in mind the above reservations it is time to investigate the following aspects related to the

statistically representative character of patent court decisions:

(i) Is it possible at all to reliably compare ﬁrst and second instance decisions for the purpose of

systematic extraction of legal validity information?

(ii) Do patent courts, in any case, produce sufﬁcient quantities of case law for statistical methods to

deliver reliable results?

(iii) The selection effect: are appeal decisions qualitatively representative in view of the total population

of those decisions which were not appealed?

1.1. Appeal Decisions are Statistically Representative
The underlying problem discussed in this section is of a quantitative nature and concerns the numerical
relation between second instance and ﬁrst instance decisions related to an annual cohort of PTO cases. In
order to discuss this issue further it is worth taking a look at the population of the relevant output of the
EPO. Figure 1 (not to scale) shows the population of EPO products, which are relevant for comparative
legal validity analysis. As a rule of thumb one may say that about 45% of the EPO´s opposition decisions
and 25% of the refusal decisions are appealed. These numbers stand for excellent sample sizes which

Figure 1. Population of EPO patent products

170

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

allow for a statistical accuracy of the results of around 1.6%7—which represents a dream-score for quality
managers.

It must be also appreciated that the “validity auditors” engaged for this methodology—i.e. the patent
courts in their decisions—have already ﬁnished and documented their work. The only remaining question
is the qualitative legal representative character of the appeal population (i.e. the so-called “selection
effect”).

1.2 The Appeal Population is Qualitatively Representative (the Selection Effect of Appeals)
This section deals with a qualitative question, namely with the representative character of the substantive
legal issues which are the subject of the second instance decision. In other words: are only very special
cases the subjects of appeals (by the applicant or by third parties) before the second instance? Is it not
likely that the underlying ﬁrst instance decisions in appeal cases are legally less valid than those decisions,
which are not appealed? In those circumstances, any sample of cases based on those that are appealed
would hardly be representative.

On the other hand, it would also be likely that the said 45% of opposition cases and 25% of refusal
cases are representative of the whole population (including the non-appealed decisions) in terms of their
legal validity—but not from a market point of view! Following this preferred logic, it could well be that
these cases of average legal quality concern inventions of above-average economic value and/or
inventions which play a role in a very competitive market environment.

It is important to understand and to balance all of these possibilities in order to allow an appropriate
interpretation of the proposed legal validity metrics. In this connection, it is necessary to distinguish
between the representative character8 of the legal substantive content and the degree of statistical
randomness of the appeal event. It is already safe to say at this point that—as far as legal validity is
concerned—the population of opposition appeals and refusal appeals is a sufﬁciently representative (but
not random) sample of the respective underlying opposition or refusal cases.9 In other words, there is an
economic selection effect when a party adversely affected by the ﬁrst instance decision decides to appeal.
It is, however, most likely that below-average legal validity of ﬁrst instance opposition decisions is not the
driving factor for appeals. In the case of refusal appeals, there appears to exist a low but practically
negligible correlation between the legal validity of the ﬁrst instance decision and the choice of the
adversely affected party to appeal. In other words, there exists a signiﬁcant selection effect with respect to
the economic importance of appealed ﬁrst instance cases. At the same time, there exists only a negligible
selection effect with respect to the qualitative legal validity representativeness of the appealed cases. The
remainder of this paper is concerned with the methodology of the analysis and does not present further
investigations related to selection effects.

2. Appeals Against Refusal and Opposition can be Modeled

2.1. First Methodological Considerations With Respect to Comparative Modeling of Case Law
Unlike patent quality auditors, only patent courts have, among other powers, the statutory mandate to
correct errors made at ﬁrst instance. At the same time, the second instance is also responsible for setting the
substantive legal standards for the interpretation of the patent conventions and for the development of the
law when new legal questions arise from a case. Consequently, patent judges represent a distinct authority
compared with ordinary auditors engaged in the framework of operative quality assurance. The BoAs of
the EPO are not expected to make statements concerning the quality of the ﬁrst instance decision, but they
have to provide a forum for the party which is adversely affected by a ﬁrst instance decision to obtain a
review of that decision. It is therefore necessary to investigate carefully what kind of information can be
extracted from patent court decisions (and what cannot). My objective therefore was to ﬁnd a reliable way
to extract statistical information on legal validity from a large number of BoA decisions.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

171

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

2.2. A Direct (Ex Ante) Comparison of First Instance and Patent Court Decisions is Possible

2.2.1. A Practical Case Example for Comparative Case Law Analysis
The level of legal validity of a ﬁrst instance decision can be deﬁned as the level of conformity between it
and the second instance court’s ﬁnding on same legal issues. What does this mean? Imagine, for example,
a case in which, the ﬁrst (examining) instance rejects the inventive activity of a claimed controller for a
fuel-cell powered asynchronous motor yacht drive. The applicant appeals against the refusal decision and
the patent court subsequently upholds as inventive the amended claim for the controller of a fuel-cell
powered asynchronous submarine motor drive. The question is: what does the second instance judgment
indicate about the validity of the preceding ﬁrst instance decision?10 As a ﬁrst step, the applied
comparative case law analysis methodology requires that both claims must be granulated with respect to
the claimed content in connection with the assessed legal requirements to be met. In the current case, the
claim feature of controllers for fuel-cell powered asynchronous motor drives has to be separated in
connection with the legal requirement of inventive activity. As a next step, the (history of the) second
instance judgment must be studied with respect to the court’s ex ante opinion also in connection with
motor yachts instead of submarines. Often the court will voice an explicit ex ante opinion about the
validity of the original ﬁrst instance decision. But also in cases where the court expresses no literal opinion
with respect to the ﬁrst instance assessment, it is my practical experience that—thanks to the claim content
granulation methodology—an experienced patent professional is practically always in the position to
derive the court’s ex ante opinion with respect to the originally disputed case.

2.2.2. Consequences for a Comparative Legal Validity Analysis Methodology
Please note that Figures 1–3 are available in color in the PDF and online version of this article at http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com.

We have learned from the above example that one important prerequisite to extract reliable statistical
legal information from patent validity decisions is a standardized, descriptive methodology which is
applied to the ﬁrst instance decision and to the succeeding appeal judgment. The information gained this
way is systematically “granulated” down to a level of detail which allows precise coverage of relevant
changes and amendments of the case.11 Figure 2 shows this process. For such a process it is, of course,
necessary to distinguish between appeal against refusal/rejection and appeal against opposition/
re-examination/trial.

Figure 2. Modeling of the feature components of the appealed patent (the diagram applies equally to appeals against refusal and to,
for example, appeals against re-examination or invalidation-trial decisions)

172

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

2.2.3. Quality Aspects Covered by Comparative Legal Validity Analysis
The results that can be achieved with this methodology enable reliable statements in view of:

instance;

 the quality of the opposition/re-examination/invalidation procedure and refusal/rejection decisions;
 the level of harmonization with regard to the interpretation of law between the executive and appeal
 a quantitative metric for the scope of protection of patent claims;
 the quality of patent search and patent documentation;
 appropriate patentability thresholds;
 the impact of the public (opponents) on the work of the PTOs.

2.2.4. The Importance of a Reproducible “Ex Ante” Analysis Modeling Approach
Within the framework of this paper, the concept of modeling is directed to a descriptive methodology.
Namely, a concept is required which allows for systematic “granulation” and classiﬁcation of the decision
content in such a way that the extracted information can be handled by case law analysts in close
connection with the decision context. This way, it is possible immediately (i.e. ex ante) to compare the
content of a ﬁrst instance decision with the decisive content of the second instance decision.

Hitherto, the legal and econometrical approaches for legal validity analysis based on statistical
modeling have not always been convincing in my opinion.12 It is observed that lawyers tend to interpret
case law in the attorney’s fashion, whereas they are usually show a low proﬁle in terms of quantitative (i.e.
mathematical) conceptions. On the other hand, economists usually lack of legal education, and the
concepts of bibliographic correlation analysis familiar to me are not appropriate for in-depth
investigations of legal validity of patent products.

The methodology of comparative legal validity analysis, I have developed requires experts—such as
patent examiners or attorneys—who are able to understand the respective ﬁrst and second instance
decisions in order to describe the content in an analytic way based on a deﬁned scheme. For this procedure,
it is important to refrain from the interpretation of the decision (in the way attorneys normally act on
behalf of their clients) because such an approach would often lead to a non-objective bias of the lesson to
be drawn from a decision. If these rules are thoroughly applied, the achieved results will be reproducible—
i.e. two different analysts, with identical case constellations, will arrive at virtually the same validity
classiﬁcation results.

2.2.5. Distinctive Models Supporting Inter Partes and Ex Parte Comparative Legal Validity Analysis
For the purpose of systematic classiﬁcation one has to distinguish between refusal-like13 (ex parte)
appeals and opposition-like14 (inter partes) appeals. Whereas the relevant substantive patentability
requirements (the substantive patentability requirements of the patent convention) are virtually identical
for both legal recourses, there are many procedural differences—in particular with respect to patent claim
amendments—between inter partes and ex parte appeals, and not only at the EPO. The applied
methodology therefore strictly takes into account the ofﬁcial procedures (e.g. Examination Guidelines)
and relevant landmark appeal decisions concerning substantive and procedural law questions, which were
established to govern the speciﬁc ex parte and inter partes appeal legal recourses.15 It is thus possible to
enable a direct (ex ante) comparability of the patent court’s teaching in view of the subject and legal
argumentation of the original ﬁrst instance assessment.

2.2.6. Claim Content Granulation for Detailed Legal Feature Analysis
The concept of claim content granulation builds on the idea of legal themes. Since the assessment of a
patent claim very often is based on a variety of legal objections with respect to only one or, likewise,
several claim features, every ﬁrst instance assessment must be comparatively analyzed separately with

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

173

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

respect to the second instance ﬁnal decision from an ex ante point of view. As an example: opposition
claim feature 1 (e.g. one green/light-colored ball in Figure 2) can be objected to on the grounds of (lack of)
clarity and (lack of) novelty at the same time. In parallel, opposition claim feature 2 (a second green/light
ball in Figure 2) can be objected to on the grounds of (lack of) inventive step. Consequently, the patent
claim must be granulated into three legal themes which will be comparatively analyzed from an ex ante
perspective in view of the subsequent ﬁnding on appeal.

In both cases (i.e. refusal-like and opposition-like appeal16), the features of the disputed matter are
initially identiﬁed as claimed during ﬁrst instance procedure; afterwards they equally have to be isolated
within the appeal context. This procedure of granulation of claim content is shown in Figure 2. With
respect to the EPO, it goes without saying that both the claimed subject matter and the related patentability
objections can and will change during the examination instance and BoA procedures, and the applicant/
patentee will often ﬁle several sets of (auxiliary) claim requests. These problems of analysis are met by
means of detailed granulation of the claim feature components while taking into account the claimed
context of the invention.17

It is an achievement of the proposed methodology to allow isolation of claim feature components
while maintaining the link to the context of the invention. This way, every feature that is the subject of the
ﬁrst instance and of the second instance procedure is extracted from the decisions and is thus available for
comparative analysis. It is now possible to relate these relevant features and the ﬁrst instance decision with
the conclusive ﬁnding on the facts of the case by the patent court (Laub, 2012, chapters D.I and E.I).

2.2.7. Modeling Patent Claim Requests, Including Auxiliary Requests
The green/light-colored balls in Figure 2 represent isolated claim feature components of the underlying
ﬁrst instance decision. A model patent claim (plain envelope around each four green/light balls) shall be
composed of four such feature components (green/light-colored balls). It is naturally possible to derive the
examining/opposition division’s assessment of each of these components from the respective ﬁrst instance
decision. Figure 2 is further more useful to illustrate the inherent problem—at least of the European and
the German patent systems18—of amendments and substituted features being introduced during litigation.
At both ﬁrst instance and at second instance, the applicant/patentee has the right to ﬁle a main request and
several auxiliary requests. The green/light-colored envelopes in the left-hand bucket in Figure 2 can
therefore represent patent claims from main requests or from auxiliary requests. Likewise, the green/light
balls in the right-hand bucket can stem from ﬁrst instance main requests or auxiliary claim requests. It is
now essential to analyze whether the second instance’s legal assessment of the green/light-colored ball
feature (within the context of the invention) differs from the ﬁrst instance decision or not19 from an ex ante
point of view. Accordingly, the blue/dark-colored envelopes in the right-hand bucket represent main
requests and auxiliary requests as during appeal. As mentioned above, in some legal systems it is possible
that the applicant/patentee enters the appeal stage with an already changed claim wording. Changed/added
features of an amended claim may stem from other original claims (of the original ﬁrst instance main or
auxiliary requests) or they may be supported by the description. It might therefore well be that new feature
components (blue/dark-colored balls) will appear during appeal stage side by side with the original ﬁrst
instance components (green/light-colored balls).

2.2.8. Reading Figure 2 on a Practical Example
Returning to the above practical example of patent claims for motor controllers at Section 2.2.1, a green/
light-colored ball remaining in the right-hand bucket would represent the patent court’s (implicit or
explicit) opinion with respect to the inventiveness of asynchronous motor controllers for motor yachts
whereas blue/dark balls would represent the (always explicit) court’s judgment with respect to the
application of asynchronous motor controllers for submarines.20 Practitioners know, of course, that patent

174

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

validity disputes often comprise far more than only one legal theme.21 Structured case law analysis,
however, allows the granulation of a case into as many legal themes (as shown in Figure 2) as required22 in
order to compare the court’s judgment side by side with the ﬁrst instance assessment.

2.2.9. Claim Scope Modeling
In order to take changes into account accurately, case law also require an excellent familiarity with regard
to the admissibility of claim amendments and the claimed scope of protection. It is therefore necessary to
establish a normalized concept for a relative description of scope amendments. Claim scope can be
graphically modeled via the width of arrows.23 Figure 3 provides an exemplifying illustration of possible
developments in the claim scope in the case of an appeal after a patent was maintained in amended form
after opposition. Besides Figure 3, dedicated claim scope models have been developed also for the appeal
of the opposition decision to revoke a patent and to reject the opposition as well as for the appeal of a patent
application refusal.24

2.3. Achievements of the Modeling Approach for Systematic Legal Validity Analysis
With the above feature granulation and claim scope nomenclature it is now possible to establish a
comparative legal validity analysis methodology which allows the projection of the conclusive arguments
of the patent court directly (ex ante) on the previous ﬁrst instance assessment of the issues originally in
question. The analysis techniques chosen for this paper comprise an exemplifying selection of the
available tools of the applied methodology. The complete concept of systematic opposition-like and
refusal-like case law analysis is based on ﬁve powerful pillars:

(i) Because of their statutory nature, case law decisions are a superb resource for the extraction of

conclusive validity information.

(ii) It is possible to compare the patent scope during patent litigation.
(iii) Expert analysts, trained in the application of patent law, only require a limited, well-deﬁned set of

rules in order to exert their professional patent knowledge when using the proposed approach.

(iv) There is no need to be concerned with most procedural problems and interpretations of substantial
law when comparatively studying the ﬁrst and second instance decisions because the parties
involved, together with the PTO examination instance and the court instances, have thoroughly
solved those issues before the drafting of the substantive decisions.

(v) Every case analyzed is of an individual nature. In practice, however, it is always possible to granulate
the content of each case and to subsume relevant partial problems under the comparative analysis
rules and standards.25

Figure 3. Example of claim scope model: relative claim scope in the case of an appeal by the proprietor after opposition/re-
examination/trial had resulted in maintenance of the patent in amended form (refusal/rejection claim scope models are following a
different scheme)

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

175

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

3. Legal Validity and the Harmonization Level of a Patent System are Measurable

3.1. Methodological Considerations Relevant for the Statistical Evaluation of the Empirical Validity

Data

During practical analysis at the EPO every legal dispute could be granulated down up to around 70 single
information bits, which are classiﬁed and analyzed in a database. Due to the fact that every year about
2,000 appeals are decided at the EPO alone, such a population is a statistically signiﬁcant resource for the
analysis of the relevant substantive legal requirements.26 Also other legal systems provide for statistically
signiﬁcant populations of judicative decisions suitable for legal validity analysis purposes: at the DPMA,
annually 600 validity related cases are decided, the Chinese Beijing No. 1 IP court annually decides 460
validity-related cases, the Japanese Tokyo IP court judges about 340 cases annually, in Korea annually
about 430 cases are decided and the USPTO BoA for the Federal Circuit deliver annually more than 7,000
decisions.

3.1.1. The Understanding of First Instance Decision Validity—Why a Court’s Assessment can Differ from

the First Instance Decision

My work in this area was motivated by the idea to provide quantitative metrics describing legal
discrepancies between the judiciary and the executive instance. In an ideal patent system such
discrepancies would of course tend to be zero. In practice, it is natural that some discrepancies occur.
Hence, differences in the assessment of the merits of a case by the ﬁrst examination and by the second
instance court tribunals are caused by the ﬁve following reasons:

procedure.

patent board/court.

 The ﬁrst instance was not able to anticipate the legal interpretation of the statutory provisions by the
 Information which was introduced during the appeal stage was not available during the ﬁrst instance
 The second instance has merely provided an alternative assessment of a legal problem, whereas the
 The legal dispute has raised problems which required a landmark decision by the court, which caused
 The second instance board/court has simply erred in its assessment and conclusions.

changes to the prevailing case law; whereas the ﬁrst instance was not able to predict these changes.

decision of the ﬁrst instance was equally correct.

In the case of discrepancies,27 it is always necessary to take these ﬁve options into account during
validity analysis in order to allow an appropriate interpretation of the case and to arrive at reliable legal
validity metrics (Laub, 2012, chapter G.I.1). These considerations are equally applicable to any two
instance patent system.

3.2. What is a Realistic Expectation for the Legal Validity Level of the Executive Instance?
Empirical experience which I have gained from the comparative case law analysis methodology shows
that in the case of EPO opposition decisions, and also during succeeding inter partes appeals, an average
of only one legal objection (e.g. lack of inventive activity) is used in the decisive argumentation. In the
case of refusals and succeeding ex parte appeals, however, an average of almost two legal objections are
applied (e.g. lack of novelty in combination with a clarity objection of an ancillary claim feature
component). In this way it might happen—in particular in the case of a refusal—that the examining
division has correctly assessed a ﬁrst legal ground but has failed with (or missed) the examination of the
second or third one. It is now fair to ask whether or not the ﬁrst instance examiners have fulﬁlled their
mandate in such a case. This question would probably be answered differently by a member of the public
vs. an ofﬁcial of the patent authority. From the point of view of a member of the public it may—within

176

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

certain limits—be a matter of secondary importance28 whether or not perfect harmonization between the
ﬁrst and the second instance decisions is reached, as long as it is predictable whether the system
grants valid intellectual protection rights. In order to be predictable, a patent system must not grant
protection for any subject matter which obviously does not meet the substantive legal requirements,
whereas protection must be available for subject matter which obviously meets all substantive legal
requirements. In contrast to such a pragmatic point of view, patent ofﬁces—in the same way as any service
provider—would possibly stress the importance of perfect harmonization between the ﬁrst instance and
the court instance.

3.3. The First Legal Validity Metric: Adherence to the Individual Legal Requirements

3.3.1. The Idea of a Validity Metric for the Cumulated Annual First Instance Work
Having in mind the practical examples and having studied the theoretical considerations of the above
sections, we are now prepared to apply the analysis methodology on a large scale. In other words, a large
(statistically signiﬁcant) number of appeal cases is analyzed, and the gained validity information is
categorized and ﬁnally transferred in an overall validity metric for the legal validity of the cumulated ﬁrst
instance decision work of an annual production cohort. Due to the nature of the relevant selection
effects,29 the derived metrics will primarily show the validity of the selection of the appealed ﬁrst instance
cases. Since the selected cases are also sufﬁciently representative for the average legal validity of the non-
appealed decisions, the ﬁgures can be also interpreted as validity indicators for the overall population of
the respective ﬁrst instance refusal-like and opposition-like decisions.30

3.3.2. Interpretation of the Statistical Validity Figures
Patent courts must satisfy the highest level of legal conformity with the relevant patent act (by deﬁnition
almost 100%). Since an objective comparative description of the patent courts’ assessment is possible, the
extracted statistics are a perfect resource to derive conclusive information about the level of divergence at
ﬁrst instance with respect to substantive legal standards.31 The curves in Figure 4 are based on the whole
annual population of analyzed cases and illustrate the levels of conformity of the ﬁrst instance with the
second instance as derived by means of comparative legal validity analysis32 in terms of speciﬁc legal
requirements (Legal standards of the European Patent Convention, EPC). According to the conformity
metric for individual legal grounds (see Figure 4) “100%” means: out of 100 refusal/opposition objections

Figure 4. Conformity of the ﬁrst instance to EPC standards (legal thoroughness) from an ex ante view; ﬁgures extracted from BoA
decisions—ﬁctive ﬁgures for illustrative purpose only

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

177

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

based, for example, on a lack of novelty (article 54 EPC) of the claimed features, the BoA or patent court
equally considers all of these claimed features not novel (ex ante). It is now possible to calculate an overall
metric by summing up the weighted statistics of the individual legal requirements33 (cf. next section).
Comparative individual legal conformity metrics can be easily derived for almost every patent system.

3.4. The Main Legal Validity Metric: The Overall Level of Harmonization of the PTO First Instance

with the Legislation

The proposed legal validity approach of this paper aims for a metric of overall conformity between the ﬁrst
and the second instance. Based on the metrics of conformity to individual legal standards as introduced in
Section 3.3, Figure 5 shows the derived overall level of harmonization between the ﬁrst and the court
instance at the EPO. The single curve of Figure 5 is derived from the set of curves of Figure 4, whereas the
impact of every legal requirement is weighted according to its annual frequency in the total of the BoAs’
decisions.34 According to the overall legal conformity metric of Figure 5 “100%” means that out of 100
refusal/opposition cases, the appeal instance for all of these cases comes (ex ante) to the same conclusion
as the ﬁrst instance; that is the BoA would equally have refused/revoked/maintained the claim request (as
it was ﬁled formerly at the ﬁrst instance) in amended/unamended form—irrespective of the claim request
as ﬁnally ﬁled during the appeal procedure. The divergence-gap between the 100% mark and the overall
conformity curve in Figure 5 stands for those cases (out of 100) where the BoA disagreed ex ante with the
particular ﬁrst instance decision to refuse/revoke, maintain the patent, etc.

Every patent professional is, however, aware that in particular opposition-like procedures35 can be
complex and unpredictable—for both legal representatives and PTO ofﬁcials. Whereas the refusal/
rejection of an application or a patent revocation is binary black-or-white decision, an opposition-like
decision to maintain a patent in amended form requires a very precise trade-off between an accurately
measured (reduced) scope of protection and appropriate legal reasoning which supports the required
reduction in scope.

It is therefore questionable whether it is always possible to achieve perfect harmonization in practice.
Thus one may consider that sufﬁcient conformity between the ﬁrst and the second instance has
already been achieved when the second instance approves the formal decision (to refuse, revoke, etc.) by
the ﬁrst instance, notwithstanding any possible discrepancies36 with regard to the individual legal

Figure 5. Overall level of harmonization between the ﬁrst instance decisions of an annual cohort and the appeal instance of a
PTO—a schematic, illustrative example

178

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

reasoning—provided that no grants for allowable inventions are denied and no deﬁcient patents are
granted by the authority. Similar overall legal validity metrics can be derived from individual legal
conformity data for the most patent systems.

3.4.1. Overall Harmonization Levels of EPO Opposition and Refusal Decisions during the Appeal

Procedure

3.4.1.1. Applying the Teaching of the Quality Validity Metric Introduced in Section 3.4
Figure 5 teaches that it is possible to measure the harmonization level of ﬁrst instance decisions by means
of only one general harmonization scale. In practice, however, one must distinguish between the quality of
refusal-like and that of opposition-like decisions. Furthermore, in the preceding section, two different
quality standards were suggested, as we should distinguish between pragmatic and perfectionist quality
standards. Figure 6 is a concrete, anonymised, example of the metric explained by Figure 5 and shows the
qualitative harmonization performance level of opposition decisions during appeal for a period starting in
the early 1990s and ending in the mid-2000s. The slight decrease is marginally greater than the conﬁdence
interval for the sample of decisions that were analyzed. The overall harmonization level is therefore
acceptable. It is interesting to observe that the harmonization level for opposition decisions, measured
according to pragmatic quality standards, is only a little higher than the harmonization level for the same
decisions, measured according to the highest quality standards. It can thus be said that the legal validity of
inter partes decisions basically falls into one of two states: either the decision perfectly satisﬁes the
requirements of the BoA, or it completely fails to meet them. There is only a very small gray zone Doppo
composed of those decisions, which only satisfy the pragmatic harmonization standards (i.e. decisions in
which a formally correct result was obtained but, for example, with deﬁcient legal reasoning).

Figure 6. Overall harmonization level between opposition decisions vs. EPO appeal instance—anonymised ﬁgures; derived from
real EPO cases

3.4.1.2. Comparison of the Opposition and the Refusal Harmonization Levels
Figure 7 provides analogous ﬁgures for the qualitative harmonization level of EPO refusal decisions during
a comparable period of time.37 In comparison to Figure 6, it is striking that—in terms of pragmatic validity
standards—the legal validity of refusal decisions before the BoA is signiﬁcantly higher than the validity of
opposition decisions. When, however, the perfect validity standard is used, the EPC harmonization level for
refusal decisions is about the same as that achieved by opposition decisions. Figure 7 also provides

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

179

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Figure 7. Harmonization level between refusal decisions vs. EPO appeal instance—anonymised ﬁgures; derived from real EPO
cases

additional information: in contrast to the opposition quality ﬁgures there is a remarkably large “gray zone”
Drefu of refusal decisions which are formally conﬁrmed by the BoA, but for which the actual legal
objections of the ﬁrst instance are deﬁcient. Accordingly, the EPC harmonization levels of refusal decisions
do not show such “black-and-white” behavior as the levels of the opposition decisions.

3.4.1.3. The Quality of the Distinct Opposition Outcomes
Having read the above it would still be unfair to conclude that the (pragmatic) harmonization level of
opposition decisions is necessarily lower than that for refusals. In comparison with a refusal, the
opposition procedure is relatively complex. As a matter of fact, the opposition decision population is
composed of three core products, and the quality of these products should be investigated separately. In
other words: among about 1,300 annual opposition appeals, around 300 appeals deal with a rejection of the
opposition, 400 deal with a revocation of the patent and 600 deal with a patent as maintained in amended
form. In order to gain an objective picture about the opposition validity, it is therefore essential to
investigate these populations separately. Consequently, the overall ﬁgures according to Figure 6 are
composed of the validity measures for (i) maintenance of a patent in amended form, (ii) refusal of an
opposition (maintained as granted) and (iii) revocation of a patent in about equal weights. Figure 8

Figure 8. Comparative appeal harmonization level of the distinct EPO opposition products; derived from real EPO cases

180

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

therefore shows the speciﬁc levels of harmonization of these distinctive decision categories with regard to
the standards of the BoA.

3.4.1.4. About the Difﬁculty to Maintain a Patent in Amended Form
Comparing the statistics of Figures 7 and 8, it is remarkable that the harmonization quality of revocation
decisions arrives at about the same high level as the quality of examination refusals (on the pragmatic
standard). In contrast, the validity of maintenances in amended form achieves signiﬁcantly lower scores.
This is, however, a plausible phenomenon: whereas an application refusal and a patent revocation both
lead to a very well deﬁned result (i.e. the claim scope of protection is exactly zero), an inter partes decision
to maintain a patent in amended form has no absolute winning or losing party. It is far more difﬁcult for the
ﬁrst instance, to allow post-grant changes in the scope of a patent which exactly overcome the deﬁciencies
raised by the opponent, without favoring one of the parties. This same phenomenon would be observed for
the maintenance of patents in amended form after opposition/re-examination/validity trial in any national
patent system which offers second instance inter partes validity jurisdiction. The relatively high quality of
opposition rejection decisions can also be explained because an opposition rejection and a patent
revocation are two antipodal outcomes, with the common feature that the formal ﬁrst instance decision is
either fully conﬁrmed or fully rescinded; this leaves less uncertainty compared to a case where the scope of
a patent is maintained in amended form.

4. The Analysis Methodology for the EPO is Fully Transferable to the Relevant Patent

Systems Worldwide whilst Retaining their National Legal Autonomy

The discussion on quality among the leading patent ofﬁces worldwide de facto builds on various
procedural standards such as ISO 900138 and less formal provisions, and multilateral corporations focus
procedurally on “exchanges of best practice,” for instance. Hitherto, however, mutual recognition of
examination core products or even a worldwide harmonization of patent laws has not been achieved.
Under these conditions it appears to be consequent that the authorities worldwide would avoid at all costs
the comparison of the substantive legal work of the ofﬁces. I am of the opinion, however, that comparative
legal harmonization analysis could be established for almost all patent systems. This way it would be
possible—in accordance with Figure 5—to determine the levels of harmonization between the executive
and the judicial levels for the most patent systems, and it would even be possible to compare these ﬁgures
with each other. In such a way legal validity analysis procedures could be established for the Chinese,
German, Japanese, Korean and US patent systems (Laub, 2012, chapters J.I–J.VI). Because of the
considerable administrative efforts involved and because of the required political justiﬁcation of such a
mandate, a comparative study of international legal validity is not the subject of this article and should be
carried out under the mandate of an international organization such as the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) or within the context of a multilateral cooperation such as the IP5 (the forum of the
EPO, JPO, KIPO, SIPO, USPTO).

4.1. Application of the Legal Principles for Comparative Validity Analysis to National Patent

Systems—the Example of Germany

Almost any two-instance patent system is suitable for comparative validity analysis (cf. Section 4 above).
Thanks to the particularly good comparability between the legal recourses of the German Patent Law
(PatG) and the EPC, the following investigations are focused on the German patent system. Without
doubt, PatG law inspired the founding fathers of the EPC to a high degree. On the other hand, the German
patent system soon became harmonized with the EPC by means of the IntPatU€G.39

Most of the German and EPC legal principles and provisions can therefore be compared side by side
(Schulte, 2008). For the pragmatic purposes of case law analysis the procedural and legal principles of the

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

181

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

two respective systems are almost identical. Consequently, the refusal and opposition provisions and the
respective legal recourse to the German Patent Court (BPatGer) are very similar to the EPC system
(Laub, 2012, chapters J.I.1–2). It is, of course, not required to apply the legal construction by the EPO BoA
to foreign national patent standards. In the case of Germany, the Federal Patent Court (BPatGer) certainly
remains the only relevant forum for review of decisions. The proposed analysis does not interfere with the
territorial autonomy of German legislation and jurisprudence.

National idiosyncrasies in the interpretation of speciﬁc legal concepts are not problematic for our
purposes, because the methodology is focused on the analysis of the internal harmonization standards
within the national systems.40

4.2. Extensive Convergence of Relevant Principles between European and National Case Law
In order to create reproducible results, systematic legal validity analysis follows a well-deﬁned set of rules
which is based on relevant landmark decisions, as well as codiﬁed and ofﬁcial legal principles41 and also
of Examination Guidelines. This set of rules can be divided into ﬁve groups of legal principles as derived
from EPO practice (Laub, 2012, chapter C.III). For legal validity analysis it is consequently required that
these principles are equally applicable to the national systems:

(i) Guiding case law principles and rules for systematic validity analysis.
(ii) Common legal principles afﬁrmed by national case law.
(iii) Legal principles which are relevant for the assessment of decisions and written opinions.
(iv) Legal principles related to the claim scope of protection and subject matter.
(v) Legal principles related to the use and retrieval of prior art and citations.

These principles have been investigated regarding their applicability to the Chinese, German,
Japanese, Korean, and US patent law. It is not surprising that the German patent system shows a very high
level of legislative alignment with the EPC standards (Laub, 2012, chapter J.I.3), but the Chinese,
Japanese, Korean and US system are also very well suitable for comparative legal validity analysis
(Laub, 2012, chapters J.II.3, J.III.3, J.VI.3 and J.VI.3). It must be stressed once again that the developed
analysis approach does not question the territorial autonomy of national patent
legislation and
jurisprudence.

4.3. Comparison of the National Legal Recourses
When we are talking about “refusal-like” and “opposition-like” decisions it is also necessary to investigate
the degree of comparability between the national legal remedies and the EPO procedures. For example, in
the Chinese system, a rejection cannot be directly appealed against. Only after a re-examination procedure
is the case eligible for appeal. While German and EPO refusal and opposition procedures are quasi-
identical for analysis purposes, other patent systems formally do not know oppositions or have abandoned
the opposition procedure. At the Chinese SIPO, re-examination procedures are foreseen for both
challenged rejection and grant decisions. Likewise, the Japanese system knows dedicated ﬁrst instance
trial procedures where refusal and grant decisions can be challenged. Also Korea knows a complex system
of ﬁrst instance re-examination of rejections and trials for post-grant invalidation. All in all, the statutory
ﬁrst instance revision procedures of the Asian patent systems can easily be compared with the EPO system
for the purpose of legal validity analysis. On the other hand, the US system differs clearly from the above
legal frameworks because of the judicial status of the US BoA Appeals and Interferences (BPAI).
Contrary to the BoA and the national German, Chinese, Japanese and Korean patent courts, the superior
BPAI are part of the PTO ﬁrst instance. Consequently, BPAI decisions are regarded as case law to a lesser
degree than the other national patent courts’ jurisdiction; nevertheless they can be regarded as a second

182

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

instance for the purpose of comparative legal validity analysis. For good reasons, the US system of legal
recourses is therefore well suited for the purpose of legal validity analysis (Laub, 2012, chapter J.VI.2).

4.4. Implementation of Comparative Legal Validity Analysis in the Operative Quality Assurance

System of PTOs

After having studied the methodological principles of case law analysis and the interpretation of the
statistical validity data, the ﬁnally decisive task is to embed the approach in a PTO quality assurance
system.

Figure 9 shows the timeline of the life of a patent (application) which is in principle applicable for all
worldwide major patent systems and ofﬁces. Box (i) indicates the time at which the classical patent grant
quality audit will be carried out at a patent ofﬁce (such as the EPO). Boxes (ii) and (iii) indicate the time at
which comparative legal validity analysis can be carried out.42 Audit of opposition-like and refusal-like
decisions is currently not common at PTOs because it requires enormous extra resources. Nevertheless,
the ISO 9001 policy, which requires an assessment of all relevant processes within an organization,
naturally also recommends the audit of these procedures. Comparative legal validity case law analysis
provides an intelligent alternative/complimentary metric to the opposition and refusal quality audit; and it
is, roughly, about 12 times cheaper than an opposition and refusal audit because the already decided cases
do not have to be reviewed from scratch. Additionally, it is far more accurate than traditional audit,
because the “auditors” are patent judges. Currently, the EPO is the only patent ofﬁce in the world that has
tested such a metric, which is additionally suitable to provide top management with hard numbers about
the adherence of the examiners to the standards set by the patent courts.

Figure 9. Operative quality control measures during the life of a patent (application)

4.5. The EU Patent: the EU Revocation Procedure will Compete with the EPO Opposition and Inter

Partes Appeal Procedure

Box (iii) of Figure 9 also points to the application of comparative legal validity analysis in a supranational
environment. It is expected that by 2015, at the latest, the EU Patent43 will enter into force, and the EPO is

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

183

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

certainly well aware of the respective important changes and challenges. In the ﬁrst place the EPO BoAs
have respectfully taken note of the establishment of the Court of Appeal of the Uniﬁed Patent.44 Initially
more signiﬁcant, however, will be the impact on the EPO opposition instance which it will ﬁrst experience
with the operation of the EU Patent Court of First Instance most probably starting from 2015.

Prospective EU patents will be granted by the EPO authority according to exactly the same
substantive patentability standards as the EPC.45 Consequently, future EU revocation suits in front of the
EU Patent Court of First instance46 will also be decided on basically the same substantive legal provisions
as oppositions against European patents47 at the EPO according to article 99 EPC. Should the EU patent
court, in individual cases, decide not to stay the proceedings, it may be the case that EPO opposition and
EU revocation procedures against identical patent claims will take place in parallel. A practically more
signiﬁcant impact of the European Patent Court of First Instance will, however, to be expected in the case
of those revocation suits:

(i) where the plaintiff uses the EU revocation procedure against the EU patent instead of opposing the

identical European Patent at the EPO;

(ii) where a counter claim for patent revocation is raised against a EU patent during the course of a patent

infringement suit.

Should the EU patent be well received among the system’s users, it is expected that the Court of First
Instance, already in the ﬁrst year, may face a workload of about 100 revocation suits. Given a good
performance of the EU patent, these numbers are expected to grow to 1,000 per annum by 2020.48 The
legal validity of a signiﬁcant portion of these decisions will subsequently be challenged via appeals to the
Court of Appeal of the Uniﬁed Patent.

It is my personal opinion that the EPO will necessarily have to investigate the present level of legal
harmonization between the EPO ﬁrst and second instance preferably by means of the statistical analysis
approach introduced in this paper. As a next step, the respective level of harmonization between the ﬁrst
instance and the second instance of the Uniﬁed Patent Court should also be estimated by strict application
of analogous analysis rules. The results could then be easily and directly compared with validity scores of
the EPO. Due to the volatility of the harmonization level which will have to be expected between the two
instances of the new EU authority, it must be of a particular interest for the EPO to prove objectively its
superiority and to maintain this advantage as long as possible.

4.6. Statistical Considerations
In addition to the legal and procedural considerations it is ﬁnally important to take into account the
statistical representativeness of the population of appealed cases versus non-appealed opposition-like and
refusal-like49 decisions.50 When the sizes of the national patent ofﬁces’ opposition-like and refusal-like
populations and the populations of the respective appeals are known, it is possible to estimate the
statistical accuracy of the applied legal validity analysis methodology. In the case of Germany, the
expected statistical accuracy of legal validity analysis would arrive at 3.2% for refusal-appeal analysis and
at 5.1% for opposition appeal analysis (both ﬁgures are slightly lower than for the European Patent
System). The Chinese, Japanese, Korean and the US patent systems would arrive at similar accuracy levels
(Laub, 2012, chapters J.I.4, J.II.4, J.III.4, J.IV.4 and J.VI.4).

These accuracy values would satisfy the requirements of PTO quality management systems (QMS)
very well. The expected statistical results currently cannot be provided by the tools of contemporary QMS,
which do not regularly analyze refusal and opposition-like products. Most importantly, however, no audit-
based QMS is suited to shed light on the level of legal harmonization between the ﬁrst and the court
instance.

184

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

4.7. Further Perspectives
The principle of comparative case law analysis could be implemented concurrently in the relevant patent
ofﬁces worldwide. Such a co-operation could be governed, for example, by the WIPO or the IP5 forum.
While maintaining the legal autonomy among the participating national patent systems (principle of
territoriality), it would be possible—for the ﬁrst time—to investigate and to compare the respective
internal legal harmonization levels among the PTOs and the patent courts/boards in charge. This would be
all the more of high general interest also for legislators because the national patent boards/courts represent
the respective national patent statutes.

Besides their jurisdiction over refusal and opposition proceedings, national patent courts are also in
charge of nullity cases. It has already been illustrated by example of the EU Patent in Section 4.5 above:
because of their similarity to appeals, national nullity cases could equally be analyzed by means of the
tools described in this paper (cf. box (iii) in Figure 9).

It should be obvious that larger patent ﬁrms or industrial companies with a large patent portfolio could
also use comparative legal validity analysis in order to gain information about their work (and the work of
their competitors) simply by systematically analyzing the history of their cases as published by the PTOs
and courts.

About the Author

Dr. iur. Christoph Laub, Dipl.-Ing., LL.M. IP (MIPLC), examiner in the ﬁeld of computer implemented
inventions and project manager in the area of patent quality metrics, EPO, Bayerstr. 34, D-80335 Munich,
Germany. He is author of publications in the ﬁeld of software patentability and legal validity concepts for
PTO quality management; e-mail: christophlaub@gmx.de

Notes

This article solely reﬂects the personal opinion of the author. I would like to thank Professor Dr Christoph
Ann LL.M. TU Mu¨nchen, who always encouraged me to think my ideas through to the end. I also owe a
debt of gratitude to Dipl. Ing. Harald Boetticher, Directorate Advisor at the EPO, for his many insightful
remarks with respect to our daily business.
1. ISO 9001 is an established industrial process quality standard developed and maintained by the International

Organisation for Standardisation, ISO, Geneva.

2. The EPO Boards of Appeal are referred to as courts in the framework of this paper. cf. EPO Enlarged Board of
Appeal, decision G 2/06, Reasons 4. The expression “executive instance” shall solely cover the ﬁrst—
examination and opposition—instance.

3. European Patent Ofﬁce (2012), EPO Ofﬁce Journal, Special Edition, European Patent Ofﬁce Board of Appeal

Case Law, 3.

4. Within the framework of this paper, the PTO examining and opposition decisions are considered ﬁrst instance

decisions while the EPO BoA and national patent courts are considered the second legal instance.

5. EPO Enlarged Board of Appeal (EBoA) Decision G 2/06, Reasons 4, Ofﬁcial Journal EPO 5/2009, 318 paragraph
4: “Whereas EPO Boards of Appeal have been recognized as being courts or tribunals […] of an international
organisation […].”

6. A detailed description of the methodology, of relevant legal principles and the developed legal validity metrics

can be found in the author’s book on this subject (Laub, 2012).

7. With a conﬁdence interval of 90%.
8. That is the comparability of the population of the ﬁrst instance’s work against which an appeal was ﬁled with these

ﬁrst instance decisions which were not appealed—in terms of the legal issues which are raised.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

185

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

9. The aspect of representative character versus statistical randomness is further discussed in the author’s book
(Laub, 2012, chapter B.III). The impact of selection effects on the representative character of the selected cases is
not the subject of this article which concentrates on an empirical legal methodology. Since this paper focuses on
the methodological aspects of comparative case law analysis which are decoupled from statistical considerations,
it is sufﬁcient to know at this place that the negative impact of the selection effect is sufﬁciently low, while the
selection effect for refusal appeal appears to be slightly larger than for opposition appeal.

10. As an additional challenge for comparative prior art analysis, it must also be considered that in some legal systems
the parties are allowed to introduce new prior art and evidence or to change their legal arguments during appeal.
11. Important examples are: the substantive legal arguments, amendments of the claimed matter, admissibility issues

or the prior art cited against the claims, etc.

12. cf. the section Introduction above.
13. That is rejection.
14. That is re-examination and invalidation trial.
15. That is inter partes and ex parte appeal.
16. And similarly appeals of rejection re-examination, invalidation trials, etc., cf. also Section 4.2 below.
17. cf. Supra n. 11.
18. In other patent systems, like in the United States, the boards and courts are not allowed to ﬁnally decide on ex post

amended claims during appeal; a convenient fact which simpliﬁes comparative legal validity analysis.

19. It should be mentioned that the legal provision of interlocutory revisions (article 109 EPC) has no impact on the
concept of comparative analysis, because decisions rectiﬁed by the ﬁrst instance are not subject of further appeal,
and decisions which are not rectiﬁed are subject of regular appeal and can be conventionally analyzed.

20. Some patent systems (e.g. the United States) do not allow ﬁnal court decisions of amended claims. This is even

advantageous for case law analysis because of the explicit nature of the courts’ rulings.

21. Example for a ﬁrst legal theme: the issue of inventiveness of a particular motor controller. Please note that the
issue of novelty of the same particular motor controller would represent—per deﬁnition—a second legal theme.
22. Taking, for example, into account prior art, procedural requirements, admissibility, alternatives, auxiliary claims,

etc.

23. As a practical example: the claim for a general purpose off-the-shelf asynchronous motor controller has a broader

scope/longer arrow than the claim for a particular motor controller designed for submarines.

24. Equally applicable to appeals of rejection re-examination, invalidation trials, etc.
25. cf. Section 2.2.6 above about claim content granulation.
26. For example, novelty, inventive activity, clarity, added subject matter, etc. The issues of the so-called selection

effect were discussed in Section 1.2 above.

27. For example, when the court has revoked a patent claim which had been considered patentable by the ﬁrst

instance.

28. Note, however, that the EPO, the German DPMA and all other established patent authorities work without any
arbitrariness; but they may occasionally provide slightly deﬁcient arguments for an otherwise correct decision
(e.g. to refuse or to maintain, etc.).

29. As discussed in Section 1.2.
30. In Section 1, the representativeness of the appealed ﬁrst instance decisions has been discussed with respect to the
overall population including also the non-appealed opposition/re-examination/trial and refusal/rejection
decisions.

31. For example, for novelty, inventive activity, clarity, but also for thoroughness of search.
32. In practice, approximately 98% of all decisions can be attributed to a relatively limited set of around ten legal

(EPC) standards.

33. This way, one arrives at a value which describes the overall harmonization level of the ﬁrst instance in relation to

the requirements of the appeal instance and, at the same time, in relation to the patent act (cf. Figure 5).

186

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Christoph Laub

34. In other words: ﬁrstly, the full cohort of appealed ﬁrst instance decisions is analyzed with respect to
every individual legal requirement according to Figure 4. Some legal requirements are more frequently
relevant and assessed by ﬁrst instance and by the patent court, others less frequently. As an example: out of the
whole population of 100 cases article 54 is assessed 40 times, article 56 50 times and article 123 10 times.
Consequently, the impact of the article 56 validity level of Figure 4 is larger than the article 54 validity level which
again is larger than the article 123 validity scores when the overall validity of the 100 cases is calculated for
Figure 5.

35. cf. Supra n. 14.
36. For example, the maintenance of a patent in amended form with a correct claim scope or a justiﬁable refusal of an

application—independent of the detailed reasoning for the decision.

37. For reasons of conﬁdentiality, the annual cohorts years 1–7 cannot be further speciﬁed.
38. cf. Supra n. 1.
39. cf. German “Gesetz u¨ber Internationale Patentu¨bereinkommen”, IntPatU€G, Artikel 1.
40. Differing national interpretations of legal terms (e.g. the novelty requirements) are not detrimental to the
application of legal validity analysis. Even though the German and European novelty provisions (§ 3 (1) PatG vs.
Art. 54 (1) EPC) seem literally very similar, there exist signiﬁcant divergences with respect to the construction of
the concept of novelty in some cases. The EPC interpretation of novelty tends to be relatively strict, requiring that
the features must be unambiguously and directly derived from the prior art (T 410/99). In comparison, the German
DPMA and BPatG already consider novelty destroying (according to § 3 I 2 PatG) any publication which
discloses subject matter which the skilled person knows to be self-evident or as good as necessary to add, or which
by careful reading he simply recognizes and reads in (BGH, GRUR 95, 330, 332, Elektrische Steckverbindung).

41. cf. Section 2.2.
42. With respect to refusal/rejection appeal analysis, the time of a respective BoA decision is of course not dependent

on the opposition timeline.

43. Ofﬁcially: European Patent with unitary effect according to the EU Regulation No. 1257/2012 of 17.12.2012. A
ratiﬁcation by the sufﬁcient minimum of 13 member states seems realistic by spring 2015 (Dr jur Eskil Waage,
Lawyer, Dir. International Legal Affairs at the EPO).

44. Agreement on a Uniﬁed Patent Court, 16351/2/12 REV 2, article 6 (1).
45. Article 142 EPC and Regulation (EU) No. 1257/2012, article 1 (2).
46. cf. Supra n. 44, article 32 (1) d.
47. Preliminary Findings of DG Internal Market and Services—Study on the Caseload and ﬁnancing of the Uniﬁed
Patent Court; 07.11.2011; Section 4—Plaintiffs’ choice of forum for validity issues: EPO or UPC. Draft
agreement on a Uniﬁed Patent Court and draft Statute—Revised Presidency text; article 15a (7).

48. cf. Supra n. 47, Table I.1.1.
49. cf. Supra n. 13 f.
50. The issues of statistical randomness, qualitative representativeness and the so-called selection effect for appealed

ﬁrst instance decisions have been dealt with in Section 1 above.

References

Allison, J. R. and Lemley, M. A. (1998) ‘Empirical Evidence on the Validity of Litigated Patents’, American

Intellectual Property Law Association Quarterly Journal, 26, 185.

German Bundespatentgericht. (2011) Annual Report, p. 82.
Harhoff, D. and Reitzig, M. (2004) ‘Determinants of Opposition Against EPO Patent Grants—The Case
of Biotechnology and Pharmaceuticals’, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 22, 4, 443–
480.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

187

Christoph Laub

Statistical Reutilization of Patent Court Appeal Decisions

Laub, C. (2012) Legal Validity as a Worldwide Quality Standard for Patent Ofﬁces, GEW, Bd. 31, Heymanns,

K€oln.

McEldowney, S. M. (2006) ‘New Insights on the Death of Obviousness’, Stan Tech Law Review, Rev. 4.
Scellato, G., Calderini, M., Caviggioli, F., Franzoni, C., Ughetto, E., Kica, E. and Rodriguez, V. (2011) Study of the

quality of the patent system in Europe, Table 55, European Commission; Tender MARKT/2009/11/D.

Schulte, R. (2008) Patentgesetz mit EPU€, 8. Auﬂage, LXXI and Introduction, 3.
Wild, J. and Clover, J. (2010) ‘Sara-User Survey “The State of play”’, Intellectual Asset Magazine, No. 42,

p. 49.

188

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4


