The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 388–418

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2007.00328.x

Intellectual Property Rights in the Making:
The Evolution of Intellectual Property
Provisions in US Free Trade Agreements
and Access to Medicine

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian
Universit ´e Paris

Dorota M. Szymkowiak
Rutgers University

Examining 14 US free trade agreements (FTAs), this article presents a text analysis of their
intellectual property (IP) provisions with reference to patents and data protection. For each
type of provision present in a given FTA, a ‘‘unit of protection’’ is assigned in that category.
This method allows us to estimate the evolution in protection for each type of provision, both
relative to the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights standard
and from one agreement to the next. The analysis reveals a global increase in IP rights (IPR)
protection, as the agreements get more stringent and speciﬁc provisions get more intricate
and complex. But it also shows that the increase of IPR protection is not strictly linear over
time and that some variation does exist in the outcomes of the negotiations. Nevertheless,
IPR is clearly on the rise, and close comparative analysis of the different texts sheds light on
the process of the setting of these new standards. Ultimately, this analysis provides a
snapshot of the challenges that will soon be brought to bear on the policies on access to
medicine in developing countries.

Keywords: intellectual property; access to medicine; TRIPS-Plus; free trade agreements

The United States Trade Representative (USTR) has repeatedly argued that the free
trade agreements (FTAs) the United States is signing with developing countries will
not prevent them from using the ﬂexibilities included in the Agreement on Trade-
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) or taking full advantage of
the 2001 Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and public health (Doha
Declaration) (USTR, 2005, p. 9). However, the fact that some of the intellectual
property rights (IPR) provisions included in the FTAs go beyond the World Trade
Organization’s (WTO) TRIPS standards is indisputable. Based on expert analyses,
these agreements appear to represent the frontline of impeding access to affordable
medicines in developing countries (Abbott, 2004; Fink and Reichenmiller, 2005;
Mayne, 2005; Morin, 2006; Oxfam, 2006).

At the WTO, tense negotiations resulted in the Doha Declaration, giving
greater visibility to concerns about the impact IPR may have on access to medicine.
Subsequently, these concerns were highlighted in various international fora, such as

388

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

the World Health Organization (WHO) and its Intergovernmental Working Group on
Public Health, World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the World Bank, etc. As strengthening IP
protections became increasingly contentious within these multilateral fora, US trade
negotiators found less resistance within the context of bilateral trade negotiations, as
various scholars have pointed out (Morin, 2006). This is, in essence, an ingenious
strategy that Drahos refers to as forum-shifting, one ‘‘in which the US and EU shift
the standard-setting agenda from fora in which they are encountering difﬁculties to
those fora where they are likely to succeed (e.g. from WIPO to the WTO to [bilateral
intellectual property agreements])’’ (Drahos, 2001, p. 798). Indeed, it is currently much
easier for the United States to reach its objectives in bilateral negotiations.1 Unlike
multilateral contexts, where countries can build coalitions to counteract its supremacy,
the United States always has the upper hand in the asymmetrical distribution of power
characteristics of its bilateral negotiations. Yet, each agreement signed bilaterally does
consequently constitute a step toward transforming multilateral standards in the same
direction. Not only do bilateral and regional agreements impose IPR standards that
go above and beyond those agreed upon in international negotiations—in some cases
by imposing restrictive interpretations of provisions adopted multilaterally—but each
successive agreement builds on its antecedent, facilitating a steady escalation of these
standards (Drahos, 2001, pp. 799–800; see also Braithwaite and Drahos, 2000).2

Thus, one of the objectives of bilateral and regional trade agreements is their
ultimate cumulative effect. Compelling ever more countries to accept its increas-
ingly stringent IPR standards, the United States hopes to accrue a critical mass of
support. Once enough countries have signed such agreements and adopted such
standards, the United States can return to multilateral forums—WTO, WIPO,
etc.—and introduce these measures as the new international standards. It is only a
matter of time. In addition, by requiring trade partners to adopt otherwise non-
mandatory international accords, such as the International Union for the Protec-
tion of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) Convention of 1991, US FTAs are slowly
setting such treaties as the global norms. Finally, under the TRIPS Most Favored
Nation provision (article 4), any WTO member that has agreed to a higher standard
of IP protection in a trade treaty must ‘‘immediately and unconditionally’’ grant
these enhanced protections to nationals of any other member of the WTO. This
condition, intended to equalize relationships among trade partners, greatly con-
tributes to the United States’ ability to build new international standards through
bilateral negotiations and agreements (Drahos, 2001, pp. 802–3).

In this article, we intend to show how IP regulations have changed over time,
from one US FTA to another. To do so, we will focus on the different types of IPR
provisions that affect pharmaceutical products. We will compare the IP chapters of
14 FTAs,
including 12 that have been signed since 1992 and two for which
negotiations are currently suspended. These include the North American and
Central America Free Trade Agreements (NAFTA and CAFTA) as well as FTAs
with Singapore, Australia, Chile, Colombia, Panama, Peru, Oman, Jordan, Bahrain

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

389

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

and Morocco, on the one hand, and the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA)
and FTA with Thailand, on the other. Although texts used during the negotiations
are usually kept secret and made public only once the agreements have been signed
(Katt, 2006), draft texts are available in the cases of both the FTAA and Thailand
and can therefore be included in the analysis.3 While IPR provisions are admittedly
not mathematical data, it is nevertheless possible to evaluate each FTA’s level of IP
protection. Thus, taking TRIPS as a baseline, we will assess the strength of each
agreement’s IPR. In addition, we will compare the FTAs with each other to track
the trajectory of particular provisions over time.

This article focuses on the regional and bilateral trade agreements (BTAs)
signed by the United States for several reasons. For the past several decades, the
United States has played a leading role in the process of setting international IP
standards (Braithwaite and Drahos, 2000; Sell, 2003). Furthermore, since the
reinstatement of the Trade Promotion Authority (TPA)—a.k.a. the fast track
authority—in 2002, the USTR has resumed its proactive approach toward bilateral
and regional negotiations.4 This is in stark contrast to the European Commission
(EC), which has, until recently, prioritized the negotiations of the Doha round.5
Although there is some recent evidence that the EC and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA)6 are becoming more demanding in terms of IP protection,7 the
United States has long gone—and continues to go—far beyond the standards set by
other developed nations (Mayne, 2005, p.1). As such, although many countries have
implemented the TRIPS standards ahead of schedule and, in many cases, adopted
provisions more protective than the WTO standards (TRIPS-Plus) as well,8 the
recent surge of US FTAs represents the strongest rendering of TRIPS-Plus IP
protection to date. As the USTR clearly states, ‘‘the United States is committed to a
policy of promoting stronger protection of IPR. In this regard, the United States is
advancing the protection of these rights through a variety of mechanisms, including
the negotiation of free trade agreements (FTAs)’’ (USTR, 2006, p. 3).

Thus, because US FTAs represent the vanguard in IP protection, an analysis of
the evolution of their IP chapters presents an invaluable opportunity to observe new
international IP standards in the making. Furthermore, such an analysis clearly
chronicles changes in the US negotiating strategy, showing both when a speciﬁc
type of provision was ﬁrst introduced and how it has changed over time. It also
highlights links between different texts—for example, which previous agreement’s
text was used as the foundation for the drafting of another—and indirectly reﬂects
the positions of the negotiating parties. Through differences in the choice of words
as well as changes in wording, the abandonment of certain phrasings or certain
provisions altogether, a careful comparison of the language of the agreements
provides valuable insight into the dynamics of the process of negotiation.

Although an analysis of them could do much to further understanding of
this process, the underlying motives and driving mechanisms of the inclusion
of these provisions in US trade policy are beyond the scope of this article. As such,
we will examine neither the role of social actors involved in this process nor the

390

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

justiﬁcations conjured up to legitimize it. Nevertheless, by methodically evaluating
the evolution of the language and the legal framework of the agreements’ IP chapters,
we hope to present a factual vision of the evolution of US expectations and the new
landmarks promoted by the pro-IP defenders in the international IPR debates.9

We believe that the analysis of United States’ bilateral agreements is essential to
understanding the current international debate over IPR. Indeed, the trends
advanced by comprehensive bilateral or regional agreements are echoed by similar
tendencies in both multilateral negotiations, such as the Substantive Patent Law
Treaty (SPLT) at WIPO, and less visible initiatives, such as cooperation agreements
on IP that do not attract much attention but will lead to important law and
regulation changes in developing countries. Taking a closer look at what is
happening in US bilateral and regional agreements will provide information about
the United States’ current objectives and the direction in which the United States
hopes to go.

History and Chronology of US Bilateral Negotiations

There are several discernible periods of bilateral trade negotiations in the most
recent decades of US history. The ﬁrst one began in the 1980s. During the 1970s,
many developing countries had changed their IP regulations to regain ﬂexibilities,10
especially in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld, precluded by the IP systems they had
inherited from the colonial period (Drahos, 2002, pp. 8–9; Kuanpoth, 2003, pp.
47–8). As these countries levied escalating criticisms against international IP
standards, particularly the Berne and Paris conventions, the United States faced
mounting resistance in multilateral forums such as the WIPO and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). This trend inspired
the United States to press for the integration of IP protection into the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). It facilitated this process by using section
30111—unilateral threats of trade sanctions or withdrawal of trade beneﬁts—to
break any resistance thereto and by signing bilateral investment treaties (BITs) that
required ‘‘adequate and effective’’ IPR. It also signed NAFTA as well as a number
of bilateral agreements on IP,12 compelling partner countries to accept IPR
standards similar to those outlined in TRIPS ‘‘so that accepting TRIPS was no
big deal’’ (Drahos, 2002, pp. 13–4). This period ended with the successful ratiﬁca-
tion of TRIPS in 1994, a year that also marked the expiration of the fast track
authority ratiﬁed by Congress in 1974.

Contrary to what was expected once the United States achieved its objectives at
the WTO, the post-TRIPS era did not show a slowdown of its bilateral activity
(Drahos, 2002, p. 16). Negotiations toward an FTAA, involving 34 countries, as
well as FTA talks with Vietnam, Laos, Singapore, Jordan and Chile started toward
the end of the 1990s and at the dawn of the new millennium. In 2002, the Trade Act
H.R. 3009 restored the fast track authority, sparking intense negotiating activity
with Central American countries (CAFTA, including the Dominican Republic),

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

391

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

Morocco, Australia, the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), Bahrain,
Oman, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), the Andean countries, Panama, Thailand,
South Korea and Malaysia. As Schott put it ‘‘[this] spurt of negotiating activity—in
parallel with the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations in the World Trade
Organization (WTO)—is unprecedented in postwar US trade policy’’ (2004, p. 1).
In recent years, some of these negotiations have been suspended. Negotiations
for the FTAA came to a standstill in March 2004. Talks with Thailand stalled 2
years later in March 2006, followed shortly thereafter by a deﬁnitive end of SACU
negotiations in April and the suspension of deliberations with Ecuador in May.
However, as outlined in Figure 1, most of these agreements have since been signed.
Several countries are still in the mid of negotiations, including Malaysia and the
UAE.

In addition, the TPA—or fast track authority—expired in July 2007, which, if it

is not renewed, should slow the pace and dull the intensity of trade negotiations.

Analyses of the Provisions

The Bipartisan Trade Promotion Authority Act of 2002 (H.R. 3009) outlines the
USTR’s goals in general terms. It states, for example, that:

Figure 1: Chronology of the free trade agreements

392

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

the principal negotiating objectives of the United States regarding trade-
related intellectual property are . . . to further promote adequate and
effective protection of intellectual property rights, including through . . .
ensuring that the provisions of any multilateral or bilateral trade
agreement governing intellectual property rights that is entered into by
the United States reﬂect a standard of protection similar to that found in
United States law.

Subsequently, the trade agreements require very speciﬁc provisions on IP,
particularly on patents and data protection.13 These provisions can be classiﬁed into
a number of categories, including:
 patentability criteria;



 data exclusivity for data submitted to regulatory authorities;




limitations on compulsory licenses and government use of patents;
limitations or interdictions on parallel import; and
linkage between patent status and market approval.

exclusion of patent pre-grant opposition;
restrictions on grounds for patent revocation;
extension of the term of patent protection;

The evolution of these provisions from one agreement to another is presented in
Figure 2, where the X-axis represents the TRIPS standard.14 This ﬁgure is based on
text analysis of the IP chapters of the 14 US FTAs enumerated above. It compares

Evolution of IP provisions in FTAs over time

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

N AFTA

FTAA

Jordan

Singapore

Chile

C AFTA

M orocco

Australia

Bahrain

O m an

Peru

Colo m bia

Pana m a

Thailand

Patentability enlarged
Limitations CL

Revocation/Pre-grant Opp.
Limitations Paral. Import.

Extension patent term
Linkage

Data exclusivity

Figure 2: Evolution of IP provisions in the US free trade agreements (proposed or concluded)

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

393

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

the different types of provisions over time in order to assess the evolution of IP
protection levels. For each type of provision present in a given FTA, a ‘‘unit of
protection’’ is assigned in that category. This method renders an estimate of the
increase in protection for each type of provision both relative to the TRIPS
standard and from one agreement to the next. Importantly, while analysis clearly
reveals an increasing presence of TRIPS-Plus provisions over time, the most recent
agreement is not always the one stipulating the strictest standards.

Expansion of Patentability Criteria and Limitations on Exceptions to Patentability
According to TRIPS, ‘‘patents shall be available for any invention, whether product
or process, in all ﬁelds of technology, provided that it is new, involves an inventive
step and is capable of industrial application’’ (article 27.1). It also leaves WTO
member states some invaluable ﬂexibility in the way they apply this deﬁnition as
well as the option to exclude materials from patentability under some circumstances
(article 27.3). In stark contrast, FTAs tend to relax and expand patentability criteria
and limit general exclusions in several ways. Broadening the scope of patent
protection leads to an increase in the number of patents issued. Adding obstacle
after obstacle, this patent spike, in turn, creates additional barriers to generic access.
One important expansion involves new uses of known substances (a.k.a. second
indications, second medical uses, Swiss-type claims), minor changes of patented
products and ﬁxed dose combinations of patented drugs. Requiring patents for
these products, FTAs export the United States’ internal standards that consider
‘‘new uses’’ as ‘‘processes’’.15 Experts argue that these patents do not follow the ﬁrst
two criteria of patentability set by TRIPS, article 27.1—namely, that the discovery
be ‘‘new’’ and ‘‘involve an inventive step’’ (Rossi, 2006, pp. 162–3). In instituting
these standards, nations relinquish the TRIPS ﬂexibility that had left them free to
determine whether ‘‘second medical indications’’ for known products should be
patentable (Abbott, 2004, p. 10). While this type of provision was ﬁrst introduced
into US FTAs with the agreement concluded with Morocco in 2004 (article 15.9.2),
the notion of protection for new uses of known substances ﬁrst appeared in 2000, in
the provision of data protection in the FTA with Jordan (article 4.22, note 10)16
(Rossi, 2006, p. 163). Several of the agreements concluded since 2004 include this
type of extension of the scope of patentability. For example, the agreement with
Australia contains practically the same phrasing as the one with Morocco—‘‘the
Parties conﬁrm that patents shall be available for any new uses or methods of using
a known product’’ (article 17.9.1). The FTAs with Bahrain (article 14.8.2) and
Oman (article 15.8.1), as well as the draft submitted by the United States during
negotiations with Thailand (patents article 2), all include similar provisions. In
contrast, the agreements with Colombia, Peru and Panama do not speciﬁcally
mention the patentability of new uses. The use of CAFTA as the archetype during
these negotiations presents one possible explanation for this. The texts of the IP
chapters of these FTAs suggest both the use of CAFTA as a benchmark and these
nations’ willingness to abide by regional homogeneity.

394

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

Pressing forward in the march of relaxing patentability standards, the FTA
with Oman introduces the patentability of ‘‘new methods for treatment of particular
medical conditions’’ (article 15.8.1.b).17 Although negotiations have since been
suspended, the United States included a similar provision in the draft text tabled
during its sixth round of talks with Thailand as well, requiring that ‘‘Each Party
shall make patents available for the following inventions: . . . diagnostic, therapeu-
tic, and surgical procedures for the treatment of humans or animals’’ (patents article
2.b). Because of this suspension, however, there is no way of knowing whether such
a stipulation will appear in the ﬁnal US–Thailand FTA if it is eventually concluded
or whether this is a provision the United States is willing to abandon in its
bargaining with countries that are particularly recalcitrant.

Correa (2006) points out that agreements such as CAFTA introduce a deﬁni-
tion of ‘‘industrial application’’ that expands patentability to include research tools
and methods—which are usually considered ‘‘laboratory products’’ not ‘‘industrial
applications’’ and therefore not protected—declaring that ‘‘Each Party shall
provide that a claimed invention is industrially applicable if it has a speciﬁc,
substantial, and credible utility’’ (article 15.9.11). He adds that this deﬁnition is
borrowed from the United States’ internal administrative standards, codiﬁed in the
US Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce’s (USPTO) Utility Examination Guidelines.
Drawing on the case of the Genetics Institute, a US ﬁrm that owns the patent on
a method of genetic engineering used to produce erythropoietin, Correa highlights
the ways in which such a provision can block the production and commercial
distribution of generic medicines. Since CAFTA, this provision has also been
included in US FTAs with Morocco (article 15.9.11.b), Australia (article 17.9.13),
Oman (article 15.8.11.b), Peru (article 16.9.11), Colombia (article 16.9.11) and
Panama (article 15.9.11), and included in the draft text of the FTA with Thailand
(patents article 12.b).

Without a doubt, FTAs are compelling developing countries to apply low
patentability standards similar to those prevailing in developed countries. This
fosters a harmonization of standards that facilitates the granting of patents and,
correspondingly, increases the number of patents granted. Relaxing patentability
standards and giving patent ofﬁces more ﬂexibility in issuance will inevitably lead to
an inﬂux of new patent applications. Because, in most cases, these ofﬁces already
lack the resources for proper patent examination, this will undoubtedly increase the
number of contentious patents granted every year. Under these circumstances, the
only strategy to attempt to balance the system is to challenge such patents.
However, it is hard to imagine that the civil society in most of the developing
countries—whether the non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or local generic
companies—will have the capacity routinely to contest such controversial patents.
Accordingly, there is a high risk that, lacking the requisite resources, developing
countries will be unable to rein in the rise of patents to ensure a real balance.

Yet, the proliferation of patents is not solely a function of the expansion of
patentability. It is also fueled by the suppression of some of the exceptions to

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

395

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

patentability included in articles 27.2 and 27.3 of TRIPS. The Moroccan FTA and
the draft with Thailand (patents article 2) are the most restrictive in this regard.
They allow exceptions only in order to ‘‘protect public order or morality, including
to protect human, animal or plant life or health or avoid prejudice to environment’’
(Morocco article 15.9.1). The Chilean agreement does not mention exceptions to
patentability at all. Some FTAs include exceptions for diagnostic, therapeutic and
surgical methods (NAFTA, Jordan, Australia, Bahrain, Oman) and/or animals
(NAFTA, FTAA, Bahrain, Oman). Finally, others do not require restrictions and
permit exclusions as allowed by TRIPS, articles 27.2 and 27.3.a (Singapore,
CAFTA, Peru, Colombia, Panama).

The limitations on exceptions to patentability are very obvious in the case of
plants. For example, most countries signing FTAs relinquish their right to exclude
plants from patentability.18 Some FTAs, such as those with Morocco (article
15.9.2)19 and Bahrain (article 14.8.2), and the US draft in the Thai negotiations
(patents article 2) explicitly require patent protection for plants. Less stringent
agreements, such as those with Chile (article 17.9.2),20 Peru (article 16.9.2),
Colombia (article 16.9.2), Panama (article 15.9.2) and US-CAFTA-DR (article
15.9.2), require parties to make ‘‘reasonable efforts’’ to make patent protection
available for plants (Fink and Reichenmiller, 2005, p. 2). As above, this is likely a
function of the fact that the CAFTA text was used as a model for other agreements
in the region. The relevant provision in the FTA with Panama is identical to that in
CAFTA,21 while those in the Peruvian and Colombian agreements (identical to
each other) are virtually so. In other cases, such as NAFTA (article 1709.3) and the
FTAA draft (section B.2.e, article 3.3), the agreements stipulate that parties ‘‘shall
provide for the protection of plant varieties through patents, an effective scheme of
sui generis protection, or both’’. Finally, while other agreements, such as those with
Jordan, Singapore, Australia and Oman, do not cite plant matter as patentable per
se, neither do they include it on the list of matter that may be exempt from
patentability.

Despite these differences among the agreements, the general provisions of all of
their IP chapters commit the undersigned trade partners to implement the 1991 UPOV
Convention (International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants).
Thus, even countries whose agreements do not explicitly commit them to patent plants
and include the possibility of excluding plants from patentability have to at least
implement the UPOV system of protection.22 Thus, FTA partners resign the TRIPS
(article 27.3.b) option to implement a sui generis system other than the one outlined by
UPOV. As such, as a consequence of the proliferation of FTAs, the number of UPOV
members continues to climb (Drahos, 2002, p. 22; Vivas-Eugui, 2003, p. 16). The
United States uses this strategy—compelling countries to sign onto international
conventions and treaties through requirements in bilateral or regional agreements—
for others as well, including the Patent Cooperation and Patent Law treaties.

Finally, the US–Morocco agreement includes the principle of the patentability
of ‘‘animals’’ (article 15.9.2), and a similar provision appears in the draft text tabled

396

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

by the United States during its negotiation with Thailand (patents article 2.a). Other
agreements, such as those with Bahrain (article 14.8.1) and Oman (article 15.8.2.b),
as well as NAFTA (article 1709.3) and the 2003 draft of the FTAA (section B.2.e,
article 3.1), include animals on the list of exceptions to patentability. In addition, as
in the case of plants, there are FTAs, including those with Australia, Jordan and
Singapore, that neither clearly include nor exclude animals from patentability.23

Patent Revocation
With the exception of the one with Jordan, all of the FTAs tend to limit the grounds
for revocation of patents to the grounds that would have justiﬁed their refusal in the
ﬁrst place.24 Only NAFTA mentions explicitly that a patent can also be revoked
when ‘‘the grant of a compulsory license has not remedied the lack of exploitation
of the patent’’ (article 1709.8.b), an option provided by the Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property (article 5A). All of the other FTAs do not mention
the options of revocation when a patent is not worked, when the issuing of a
compulsory license has not remedied the lack of exploitation, or for other public
interest reasons (Correa, 2006, p. 3).25 For example, the Moroccan agreement
stipulates that:

Each Party shall provide that a patent may be revoked only on grounds
that would have justiﬁed a refusal to grant the patent. A Party may also
provide that fraud, misrepresentation, or inequitable conduct may be
the basis for revoking a patent or holding a patent unenforceable (article
15.9.5).

Some agreements go even further, forbidding pre-grant opposition—opposition
during the patent examination process (Rossi, 2006, p. 164). Such a stipulation was
ﬁrst introduced in a US draft tabled at the FTAA negotiations (section B.2.e, article
8.2). Since then, it has appeared in FTAs with Singapore (article 16.7.4), Morocco
(article 15.9.1), Bahrain (article 14.8.4) and Oman (article 15.8.4) and drafted into
the negotiations with Thailand (patents article 4). Once again, text analysis tracks
the trajectory of this provision—the wording of the provision proposed to Thailand
is identical to that with Oman and almost identical to that with Morocco and
Bahrain.26

Patent Term Extension
The negotiations of TRIPS ultimately led to the institution of an international
standard of patent protection of 20 years from the date of ﬁling (article 33).
However, due to the need for examination, the patent granting process necessarily
takes time. With this in mind, TRIPS also requires member states to ‘‘ensure that
the procedures for grant or registration . . . permit the granting or registration of the
right within a reasonable period of time so as to avoid unwarranted curtailment of
the period of protection’’ (article 62.2).

With the passage of the American Inventors Protection Act in 1999, US law
was amended to provide for the extension of the patent term ‘‘if the USPTO fails to

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

397

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

issue a patent within three years of the actual ﬁling date of the application’’.27 Ever
since, although such extensions are required neither by TRIPS nor the laws of most
countries—including the developed countries of Europe (Correa, 2006)—the USTR
has asked trade partners for an extension of patent term to compensate for
‘‘unreasonable’’ delays in the patent granting process, at the request of the patent
owner.

This requirement ﬁrst appeared in the FTAA draft (section B.2.e, article 9.2).
The ﬁrst successfully concluded FTA to include such a provision was the one with
Singapore, which deﬁnes an ‘‘unreasonable’’ delay to ‘‘at least include a delay in the
issuance of the patent of more than four years from the date of ﬁling of the
application with the Party, or two years after a request for examination of the
application has been made, whichever is later’’ (article 16.7.7). Following the same
model, this condition has been contained in all subsequent agreements.28 In some
cases, including CAFTA and FTAs with Chile, Panama and the Andean countries,
the ‘‘unreasonable’’ delays up for consideration are 5 and 3 years, respectively—
providing the patent ofﬁce with a little more time to complete the process. More-
over, some agreements, including those with Singapore (article 16.7.8), Bahrain
(article 14.8.7) and Oman (article 15.8.7), and the Thailand draft (patents article 8),
provide that an extension of patent duration must also be granted if the country
registers a patent on the basis of an examination conducted in another country
where it experienced ‘‘unreasonable’’ delays.

In addition to these provisions, all FTAs provide for extension of patent terms
in cases of ‘‘unreasonable’’ curtailment of patent duration due to the marketing
approval process.29 For example, the agreement with Panama provides that:

With respect to any pharmaceutical product that is covered by a patent,
each Party shall make available a restoration of the patent term to
compensate the patent owner for unreasonable curtailment of the
effective patent term resulting from the marketing approval process
related to the ﬁrst commercial marketing of the product in that Party
(article 15.9.6.b).

Some agreements—Bahrain (article 14.8.6.b.ii), Oman (article 15.8.6.b.ii),
Thailand draft (patents article 7.b.ii)—also stipulate that extensions have to be
granted if marketing approval is given based on marketing approval given in
another country where ‘‘unreasonable’’
the patent duration
occurred.30 Although the way in which countries need to enforce that type of
provision is unclear in most agreements (NAFTA, Jordan, Chile, Singapore,
Morocco, Australia), the FTAs with Bahrain, Oman, as well as the draft with
Thailand clarify that, in cases of vicarious approval, the extension provision is to be
applied onto the delays occurring in the country in which marketing approval is
sought, as well as in the country in which it was ﬁrst given (Correa, 2006, p. 4).

limitation of

Under FTAs that guarantee patent term extensions under these multiple
circumstances, nothing appears to prevent the granting of such extensions in cases

398

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

that meet multiple criteria (Correa, 2006, pp. 4–5). Thus, even under agreements
that stipulate partners can apply for only one extension of term per criterion, it
seems possible that they could apply for such extensions for each such criterion
independently. In other words, a patent owner could demand patent term exten-
sions for both delays in patent granting and delays in marketing approval. The
question remains as to whether these extensions would transpire concurrently or
consecutively.

If true, the contention that FTAs constitute the export of US law—in the sense
that FTA provisions are often based on the principles underlying US legislation—
does not imply that internal standards are simply reproduced in international
agreements. A direct comparison of the exact content of US law and the FTAs
reveals that FTA trade provisions often stipulate IPR standards stricter than those
imposed within the United States. Such a comparison also highlights cases in which
FTA provisions reproduce US regulations only in part, leaving out the elements
intended to balance their effect (Abbott, 2006; Correa, 2006).

Thus, although the US Patent Act does provide for extensions of patent term to
compensate for delays in marketing approval (35 U.S.C. ‰ 156), this mechanism—
pursuant to the Hatch–Waxman Act of 1984—is more speciﬁc and controlled than
that put forth in the FTAs (Abbott, 2006, p. 11; Correa, 2006, p. 4). For example,
calculated from the date of patent granting, the period of effective patent protec-
tion, including any relevant extension, cannot exceed 14 years (35 U.S.C. 156 c.3).
The FTAs stipulate no such limitations; they neither specify the duration of
compensation nor set ceilings on extension terms. Similarly, presumably to leave
room for maneuvering, FTA provisions fail to deﬁne what should be considered an
‘‘unreasonable’’ delay. To boot, Correa points out that ‘‘[d]ue to the shortening of
the marketing approval time in the last years, the extension provisions in the United
States are not applied in practice’’ (2006, p. 4).

Data Exclusivity
Beside the patent system, the FTAs introduced another means to establish a form of
monopoly—data exclusivity. In order to secure marketing approval, companies
have to provide regulatory agencies (e.g. the Food and Drug Administration in the
United States) with clinical data to substantiate claims of the safety and efﬁcacy of
their products. Data exclusivity prohibits relying on these data to approve generic
versions of the original product. Not only does this block generic competition even
in the absence of patent protection, but it establishes a monopoly that, because
there is no clear mechanism to do so, is more difﬁcult to challenge than a patent.
TRIPS, article 39.3 requires protection of marketing approval data against

disclosure and unfair commercial use, providing that:

Members, when requiring, as a condition of approving the marketing of
pharmaceutical or of agricultural chemical products which utilize new
chemical entities, the submission of undisclosed test or other data, the
origination of which involves a considerable effort, shall protect such

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

399

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

data against unfair commercial use. In addition, Members shall protect
such data against disclosure, except where necessary to protect the
public, or unless steps are taken to ensure that the data are protected
against unfair commercial use.

Thus, under article 39.3, except in very limited conditions, regulatory agencies can
neither make the inventor data public nor share them with any speciﬁc third party.
When another company requests marketing approval for a generic version of an
already approved product, however, nothing in TRIPS prevents the regulatory agency
from relying on the data submitted by the ﬁrst applicant. Therefore, in most countries,
the regulatory agencies do not require the second applicant to repeat clinical trials—
which would be unethical—to provide new data. In many of these countries, the
regulatory agencies ask for bioequivalence test results measured via in vivo testing in
human subjects. Such tests, evaluating the similarity of bioavailability parameters
between the two products, are intended to prove their interchangeability. In addition,
many countries further simplify the approval process, granting approval based on the
fact that the product has already been approved in another country.

In stark contrast, like national law in the United States (21 U.S.C. 355.c.3.E.ii
and iii) and Europe (2004/27/EC), the FTAs stipulate that, usually for a period of 5
years, these data are exclusive to the company that submits them and cannot be
used as the basis for market authorization for a product from another company.
The United States’ push for a 5-year data exclusivity period dates as far back as the
negotiations that resulted in the ratiﬁcation of TRIPS. The US petition was rejected
at the time (Abbott, 2004, p. 6). In its FTAs, the United States has taken the
opportunity to introduce an interpretation of the TRIPS notion of ‘‘unfair
commercial use’’ that bans competition and creates a commercial exclusivity, as
long as the generic manufacturers do not redo the clinical trials.31

Although data exclusivity provisions were included in the early FTAs, the
requirements have become gradually more demanding over time. For example,
NAFTA reﬂects the TRIPS standard for data protection but also requires that ‘‘no
person other than the person that submitted [the data] may, without the latter’s
permission, rely on such data in support of an application for product approval
during a reasonable period of time after their submission. For this purpose, a
reasonable period shall normally mean not less than 5 years from the date on which
the Party granted approval to the person that produced the data for approval to
market its product’’ (section 1711, article 6). This measure also applies in cases
where marketing approval is based on marketing approval given in another party
(section 1711, article 7), which means that data exclusivity is activated by proxy,
even without the actual submission of the original data in the country in question.
Similarly, the draft of FTAA requires a 5-year period during which no third
party is allowed to obtain marketing approval for the same or similar product. As in
NAFTA, this also applies when the regulatory agency in the country relies on the
marketing approval of the original product given in any of the countries covered by

400

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

the regional agreement. The FTAA draft stipulates that if the original product is
not on the market in one FTAA country but is on the market in another, the
agreement prohibits generic versions in the ﬁrst country for 5 years ‘‘from the date
of approval in the Party or the date of approval in the other Party, whichever is
later’’ (section B.2.j, articles 1.2 and 1.3). In addition to this period of exclusivity,
the introduction of the original product in the country a couple of years later could
set off another 5 years of exclusivity. While NAFTA, like TRIPS, article 39.3 above,
provides data protection for ‘‘pharmaceutical or agricultural chemical products that
utilize new chemical entities’’, the FTAA draft casts a wider net with the hazier term
‘‘pharmaceutical product’’. Thus, a product that cannot be protected by a patent
because it does not meet patentability criteria in terms of novelty may nevertheless
be able to capitalize on the data exclusivity provision to monopolize the market.

But the draft goes even further. Under its provisions, a product can beneﬁt
from data exclusivity protection even once the patent protection has expired
(section B.2.j, undisclosed information, article 1.4). Such protection could block
the marketing approval of a generic version produced or imported under compul-
sory licensing. In addition, as some experts argue, such provisions could ‘‘extend the
term of data protection to the full term of a patent, rather than ﬁve years’’ (Abbott,
2004, p. 8). In the end, Abbott points out, ‘‘marketing exclusivity could be up to
twenty years or more, depending on the remainder of the patent term’’ (2004, p. 8).
The language of the FTA with Jordan is closer to TRIPS and more ambiguous
than other FTAs. Because it mentions neither a ban on third party marketing
approval nor marketing exclusivity for the product originator (article 17.22), it
leaves more room for interpretation of the meaning of ‘‘protection against unfair
commercial use’’. However, this agreement introduces several speciﬁcations that
have been reused in later ones, reinforcing the scope of the data exclusivity
provisions. For example, data protection applies to ‘‘evidence of approval
in
another country’’, which means that even if the original product is not on the
Jordanian market, the fact that a regulatory agency provided marketing authoriza-
tion somewhere in the world can trigger the protection. In addition, it explicitly
states that a 3-year period of data protection must also be granted for ‘‘new uses for
old chemical entities’’ (article 17.22), thereby introducing the notion of protection
for new uses of known products.

The data exclusivity section of the FTA with Singapore contains provisions
similar to the draft of FTAA, including notiﬁcation of the identity of third parties
petitioning for marketing approval during the patent term and data exclusivity for
‘‘pharmaceutical products’’, not only ‘‘new chemical entities’’ (article 16.8.1–4). If
the regulatory agency grants marketing approval based on approval granted in
another country, data exclusivity applies from the date it was granted ‘‘in the
territory of the Party or in the other country, whichever is later’’ (article 16.8.2). As
in the case of Jordan, even if the product is not on the Singaporean market, it can be
protected by market exclusivity as long as the company submitted test data to and
received market authorization from any regulatory agency anywhere in the world.

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

401

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

Similar provisions are contained in CAFTA and the FTAs with Australia and
Bahrain. CAFTA provides 5 years of marketing exclusivity to ‘‘new pharmaceutical
products’’32 even in cases where the country’s regulatory agency issues marketing
approval based on approval issued in any other country in the world (article
15.10.1.b). This provision, also contained in the Australian and Bahraini agree-
ments, goes beyond the FTAA standard that provided such protection only in cases
of approval by proxy in other FTAA countries.

In addition, the agreement with Singapore requires that it not alter the term of
data protection even if the patent term expires before the end of the protection
period article (article 16.8.3). This provision, originally introduced in the FTAA
draft, is also contained in the Moroccan, Australian, Bahraini, Omani, Peruvian
and Colombian agreements, as well as the draft FTA with Thailand. It could
effectively block the marketing of any product manufactured or imported under a
compulsory license.

The data exclusivity section of the US–Chile agreement (article 17.10) applies
only to a new chemical entity, does not mention marketing approval being based on
approval given in another country, and does not specify that marketing approval
shall not be granted to a third party before the expiration of the patent term.

CAFTA provides 5 years of data exclusivity for new pharmaceutical products
and speciﬁes that ‘‘in order to receive [this] protection . . . , a Party may require that
the person providing the information in the other territory seek approval in the
territory of the Party within ﬁve years after obtaining marketing approval in the
other territory’’ (article 15.10.1.b). This can be used by countries to oblige the owner
of the original product to put it on their market. At the same time, if the company
owning the original product takes full advantage of this provision and waits a full 5
years before requesting marketing authorization in a CAFTA country, the total
length of data exclusivity for the product could be 10 years.

Data exclusivity provisions go even further in several recent FTAs, requiring
countries to protect ‘‘new’’ clinical information, which is usually submitted along-
side an approval application for a speciﬁc use of an already registered product.
Most likely because they were styled after CAFTA, the agreements with Colombia,
Peru and Panama do not require such exclusivity. The Moroccan (article 15.10.2),
Australian (17.10.2), Bahraini (article 14.9.2) and Omani (article 15.9.2) agreements
and the Thai draft (Measures Related to Certain Regulated Products, article 2), on
the other hand, oblige parties to provide a 3-year period of exclusivity for such ‘‘new
clinical information’’ submitted for approval in the party or in any other territory.
This opens the door to an endless renewal of marketing exclusivity, as long as new
clinical information is provided. It also provides an opportunity for originators of
such ‘‘new clinical information’’ to try to prevent approval for generic versions of
old products, claiming that there are overlaps between the uses.

Accepting the principle that generic companies should compensate product
inventors for their investment in producing marketing data, the Andean countries
presented the United States with a proposal that would allow the marketing

402

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

authority to rely on the original data as long as the generic company paid a royalty
to the originator. But, while such a compensation option is permitted for agro-
chemicals under the US Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
(FIFRA) and provided for under agreements signed by other developed countries,
such as those in EFTA (Correa, 2006), the United States refused to consider the
proposition (Rius Sanjuan et al., 2006).

important

the most controversial and most

The issue of data exclusivity holds a prominent place in the USTR’s Special
301 report as one of
for US
interests. Many countries that have signed US FTAs nevertheless appear on
the list for, among other things, failing to implement their respective agreements’
IPR standards to the USTR’s satisfaction. As of 2006, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru and Vietnam remained
on the watch list (USTR, 2006). Among its main problems with these allegedly
noncompliant countries, the USTR cites their ‘‘lack of effective protection against
unfair commercial use of undisclosed test and other data submitted by pharma-
ceutical and agricultural chemical companies seeking marketing approval for their
products’’ (USTR, 2006).33

Limitations on Compulsory Licensing and ‘‘Government Use’’
Compulsory licensing is one of the major ﬂexibilities provided by TRIPS. In
cases where the government determines that a monopoly is creating a nationwide
problem, TRIPS, article 31 allows that government to use or permit a third
party to make use of an invention protected by a patent without the patent holder’s
consent.34 This right is unequivocally provided for in the Doha Declaration on
Public Health, which recognizes that ‘‘each Member [of the WTO] has the right to
grant compulsory licences and the freedom to determine the grounds upon which
such licences are granted’’ (Doha Declaration, section 5.b).

However, some FTAs create direct restrictions on the grounds on which
compulsory licenses can be granted. For example, the Jordanian agreement
provides that:

Neither Party shall permit the use of the subject matter of a patent
without the authorization of the right holder except in the following
circumstances:

(a) to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative
process to be anti-competitive;

(b) in cases of public non-commercial use or in the case of a national
emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, provided that
such use is limited to use by government entities or legal entities acting
under the authority of a government; or

(c) on the ground of failure to meet working requirements, provided that
importation shall constitute working (article 4.20).

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

403

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

Similar provisions appear in FTAs with Singapore (article 16.9.6) and Australia
(article 17.9.7), as well as the FTAA (section B.2.e, article 6) and Thailand (patents
article 6) drafts. Like the agreement with Jordan, these texts allow compulsory
licenses to remedy anticompetitive practices, in cases of national emergency or other
extreme urgency, and for public non-commercial use.35 However, unlike the Jordan
FTA—and in spite of the Paris Convention36—the FTAA draft, the agreements
with Singapore and Australia (Morin, 2006, p. 47) or the US draft with Thailand
eliminate the possibility of compulsory licenses in cases of ‘‘failure to meet working
requirements’’.

Among other additional restrictions, the FTAA draft prohibits export under
compulsory licenses and stipulates a very circumscribed conception of ‘‘government
use’’—only the government can buy a product manufactured under a compulsory
license (section B.2.e, article 6.1.b).37 This draft text also forbids compulsory
licensing before the expiration of ‘‘a three (3) year period following a patent grant,
or four (4) years following the application for a patent’’ (section B.2.e, article 6.2).
Although they appear in the draft the United States tabled at the Thai negotiations
in early 2006 (patents article 6.1-2),38 similar limitations have been left out of the
many agreements that have been concluded more recently (Chile, CAFTA, Mor-
occo, Bahrain, Oman, Colombia, Peru and Panama).

The reason these restrictions have been written out of the latest agreements
is unclear. In some cases, such as the Moroccan agreement, this is likely because
national law already restricts grounds for compulsory licensing (law 17-97/31-05,
article 60). It may also be that the adoption of the Doha Declaration has left the
United States disinclined to require such strict restrictions—although the Austra-
lian FTA, concluded after the adoption of the Doha Declaration, does include
them—or has given other countries enough bargaining power to contest their
inclusion if the United States does propose it. It is also possible that the United
States prioritizes imposing these restrictions in countries with signiﬁcant production
capacities—such as Australia and Singapore, but also Brazil, Argentina, Thailand
and even Jordan—but is willing to abandon them in countries lacking such
facilities.

However, as described above, even countries whose FTAs leave out limitations
on the grounds to issue compulsory licensing will inevitably feel the impact of the
data exclusivity provision that prohibits the registration of generic products for a
period of at least 5 years regardless of the issuing of a compulsory license.
Furthermore, most agreements specify that the parties must prevent marketing
approval of generic products during the patent term without the consent of the
patent owner, which again will nullify the beneﬁt from the compulsory licensing.39
As Oxfam points out, both the US Congress and civil society have repeatedly
petitioned the USTR to clarify the impact of data exclusivity on the registration of
generic products manufactured or imported under compulsory licenses. They have
been unsuccessful. In addition, as described above, during negotiations with the
United States, the Andean countries submitted a proposal that would override data

404

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

exclusivity to permit marketing approval for generic products acquired under
compulsory licenses. US delegates refused to consider it.

Furthermore, limitations on compulsory licensing may prevent countries from
exercising their right, under the WTO’s ‘‘paragraph 6’’ decision, to export generics
produced under compulsory licenses to countries with insufﬁcient or nonexistent
manufacturing capacity. Morin (2006, p. 47) points out that,
in cases where
countries are willing to use the ‘‘paragraph 6’’ solution, they will have to bargain
with the United States. This was the case with Canada, who signed a memorandum
of understanding with the United States to ensure NAFTA would not interfere with
the Canadian Bill C-9 to export generic medicines to developing countries.40

Finally, beside the provisions regarding IPR, the use of compulsory licenses is
likely to be impacted by the agreements’ investment chapters. Indeed, as Weissman
(2004) pointed out, the FTAs’ deﬁnition of investment encompasses IP.41 Under
this comprehensive conception of investment, compulsory licensing can be con-
sidered a measure affecting foreign investors and, thereby, an act of expropriation.
Admittedly, several agreements (for example with Singapore, Chile, CAFTA,
Morocco or Australia) explicitly exclude compulsory licenses from the scope of
expropriation acts, provided the countries follow the regulations outlined in
TRIPS.42 However, in a context where political intimidation is the status quo
and compulsory licensing is far from the developing world’s routine repertoire, any
given developing country may be reluctant to issue a license, for fear of complaints
by US companies and penalties under the investment chapters of the FTAs.43

Limitations on Parallel Import
Parallel importing is the importing of a patented product that has legitimately been
put on the market in another country without the consent of the patent holder.
Options for parallel importation are regulated by the system of exhaustion of rights
instituted in a given country, which can be national, regional or international.
Operating under an international system of exhaustion, a country can freely import
products placed on the market in any other country. Under such a system, the
patent holder’s rights to control product circulation are exhausted when the
patented product is ﬁrst marketed in any country of the world. By contrast, under
national exhaustion regimes, patent holders can restrict parallel
importation.
Regional exhaustion systems, such as, for example, those instituted in the EU
and in the 16 countries of the African Organization for Intellectual Property
(OAPI), limit parallel importation to products marketed in other countries within
the region.

Although the United States and other countries tried to impose the principle of
national exhaustion, negotiations among future WTO members revealed resistance
to these efforts. In the end, TRIPS steered clear of the issue, declining to take a
stand on the matter of the exhaustion of IPR (article 6).44 As the Doha Declaration
conﬁrms (paragraph 5(d)), this ofﬁcial neutrality effectively renders member
countries completely free to opt for the exhaustion systems of their choice. As

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

405

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

such, most US FTAs (NAFTA, CAFTA-DR, Vietnam, Jordan, Chile, Bahrain,
Oman, Colombia, Peru, Panama and the Thailand draft) do not address the issue of
rights exhaustion. Nevertheless, several others do either curb or prohibit parallel
import.

For example, the draft of the FTAA requires countries to set up ‘‘at least’’ a
regional exhaustion system within 5 years (section A, article 4). The FTA with
Singapore requires parties to provide the patent holder with a ‘‘cause of action’’ to
prevent the procurement of a patented product without authorization or as
compensation in cases where it would contravene a contract between patent holder
and licensee, regardless of where this contract was signed. The Moroccan agreement
stipulates that a patent holder’s rights to restrict the importation of a patented
product—or a product resulting from a patented process—is not limited by its
production and distribution outside of the parties (article 15.9.4). This type of
provision restricts the use of parallel import. Patent holders can, for example,
prevent parallel importation through licensing contract—which prohibits the resel-
ling of a product. The Australian FTA includes a similar provision (article 17.9.4).
Of late, the issue of parallel importation or re-importation is at the heart of an
internal US debate about the import of discounted pharmaceutical products,
particularly from Canada. If Congress were to rule to allow the importation of
medication, the restrictions set forth in the FTAs would present an obstacle to the
implementation of the new policy.

Linkage between Patent Status and Market Approval
By itself, the existence of one or even several patents protecting a product does not
preclude the registration of its generic versions. Regulatory agencies, which are
most often a part of the health ministry, are not involved in the patent-granting
process. In most cases, they have neither any knowledge of which patents are being
granted nor any particular capacity to evaluate their validity. However, although
patent rights are private rights, the provisions of a number of US FTAs compel
regulatory agencies to take up a new role, as enforcers of patent owners’ rights.
Indeed, most of the agreements create a link between marketing approval and
patent status. Instead of leaving patent owners and their generic competitors to seek
conﬂict resolution in the courts, FTAs forcibly involve the drug regulatory agency
in the business of patent protection. This larger dynamic plays out as a function of
several related parts, typiﬁed in the Chilean example, stating that:

With respect to pharmaceutical products that are subject to a patent,
each Party shall:

(a) make available an extension of the patent term to compensate the
patent owner for unreasonable curtailment of the patent term as a result
of the marketing approval process;

(b) make available to the patent owner the identity of any third party
requesting marketing approval effective during the term of the patent; and

406

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

(c) not grant marketing approval to any third party prior to the
expiration of the patent term, unless by consent or acquiescence of the
patent owner (article 17.10.2).

First, as discussed above, all US FTAs oblige the patent ofﬁce to extend patent
terms to compensate patent owners for ‘‘unreasonable’’ delays in the marketing
approval process.45

In addition, most agreements require that parties ‘‘not alter the term of the
protection’’ of data exclusivity even in cases where the patent itself expires before
the end of this predetermined term.46 Under this provision, original patent owners
can beneﬁt from marketing exclusivity even after the patent has expired or a
compulsory license has been issued. Generic versions can only be marketed after the
expiration of the term of data exclusivity.

Going further, a large majority of the agreements also include a provision that
requires partners to ‘‘implement measures’’ in their marketing approval process to
prevent third parties from marketing generic versions of patented products during
their patent terms. This wording, introduced in CAFTA (article 15.10.2.a), is
contained in all subsequent FTAs: FTAs with Morocco (article 15.10.4.a), Australia
(article 17.10.4.a), Bahrain (article 14.9.4.a), Oman (article 15.9.4.a), Peru (article
16.10.3.a), Colombia (article 16.10.3.a) and Panama (article 15.10.2.a), and the
Thailand draft (‘‘Measures related to certain regulated products’’, article 9.4.a).
Yet, some US FTAs block generic entrance in an even more draconian way. The
agreements with Chile (article 17.10.2.c) and Singapore (article 16.8.4.c) explicitly
demand that regulatory agencies ‘‘not grant’’ marketing approval to any third party
before term expiration, ‘‘unless by consent or with the acquiescence of the patent
owner’’. Until the expiration of the period of patent protection, the country’s
regulatory agency cannot grant third-party marketing approval.

This could prove even more damaging in practice than it appears in theory. A
product is generally covered by several patents, and in some legal systems additional
patents concerning minor changes of an already known invention can be obtained
after the original product has been patented and put on the market. Therefore,
according to the language of the FTAs, it is not difﬁcult to conceive of a case where
a series of such minor ‘‘innovations’’ kept patent hold on a product whose original
patent term had long since expired. If marketing approval for the generic version
were refused for as long as there were still patents to cover some aspect of the
original active ingredient, affordable medication could be kept off the market for
decades, if not indeﬁnitely (see Correa, 2006).

Finally, except for NAFTA, all of the FTAs require regulatory agencies to not
only notify patent owners of a third party application for marketing approval but
also reveal that third party’s identity.47 According to FTA provisions, government
agencies are forced to take up the private rights of patent owners, to monitor their
competitors and, increasingly, to feed them information about these competitors’
activities.

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

407

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

As is the case with many other aspects of IPR, these standards are stricter than
those internal to the United States. Although, via the Orange Book,48 patent owners
are informed of marketing approval applications involving the products for which
they hold the patents (Rius Sanjuan, 2006), it is subsequently up to them to go to
court to prevent marketing approval for the second product. In contrast, in Europe,
as well as most other countries, drug regulation and patent protection are totally
independent (Correa, 2006).

The linkage obligations are creating exclusivity rights in addition to patent
rights. Again, precluding challenges to the legitimacy of these rights, such regula-
tory regimes abolish all mechanisms to balance the system. Only if the patent were
eventually proven invalid could these additional rights be retracted. However,
because of the aforementioned lack of resources among both the governments and
civil societies of developing countries, even controversial patents are rarely struck
down. Thus, barring the rare successful patent revocation—and regardless of the
issuing of compulsory licenses—generic competition cannot enter the market until
after the expiration of the patent term.

Conclusion

The analysis of the IP chapters of US FTAs negotiated since NAFTA reveals a
global increase in IPR standards over time. All of these agreements contain TRIPS-
Plus provisions, and IP protections introduced in FTAs since 1992 are system-
atically more restrictive than the WTO standards. Therefore, these agreements
increase the barriers to access generic medicines, either by intensifying such IP
protections as the existence and duration of exclusivity or by reducing the use of
ﬂexibilities such as compulsory licenses or parallel import.

In some of the countries negotiating with the United States, TRIPS-Plus
provisions were already part of national law and do not appear in the FTA. This
is the case, for example, with restrictions on the grounds to issue compulsory
licenses in the US–Morocco agreement. Thus, in order to provide a comprehensive
picture of the TRIPS-Plus provisions in a given country, one must consider not only
the provisions introduced in the FTA but also the national laws that predated the
agreement. Nevertheless, the conclusion of an FTA always leads to important
changes in the IP protection standards of the countries involved.

The fact that the level of IPR protection globally rises with time and with each
agreement signed indicates two things. First, the United States, which is clearly
the party pushing for the fortiﬁcation of IPR, is looking for increasingly protective
standards. Second, because TRIPS-Plus provisions are systematically included
in the FTAs and are globally ever more numerous and more protective, the
room for real negotiation on the issue of IPR seems to be limited. Although
declared by health experts and demonstrated by several studies, the impact of
these provisions on health seems to have no bearing on the dynamics of the
negotiations.

408

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

We note that the strengthening of IPR is not linear over time. The primary
reason for this is the fact that the IP protections of the FTAs signed with
Peru, Colombia and Panama are not as strict as those of the FTAs with Morocco,
Bahrain and Oman. This trend suggests that a regional factor may be in play in
both groups of countries. In the case of the Latin American countries, the regional
factor seems to have led to standards less restrictive than those reached in
negotiations with countries in other parts of the world. Although Panama, Peru
and Colombia had to agree to some limited additional restrictions (e.g. on linkage),
the level of protection they settled on is very close to the CAFTA standard. This
could be explained by the fact that the United States does not apply the same
standards to all geographical regions, but it is most likely due to the fact that its
partners are trying to limit IP protection levels by claiming regional homogeneity
and comparing the US demands they face to the standards agreed upon by the
CAFTA countries.

In the case of the Arabic countries, the levels of protection imposed by the
FTAs represent the highest levels settled on to date. The IP protection standards
included in the FTA with Morocco were clearly far more restrictive than those in
CAFTA or other previously concluded FTAs (e.g. introduction of data exclusivity
on new uses). These levels of protection are even higher than those agreed upon with
industrialized countries such as Australia or Singapore. Bahrain and Oman
accepted almost all of these levels of protection.

The difference between the Arabic countries and the Latin American countries
suggests that, although countries negotiating with the United States have not so far
been able to reject the principle of the introduction of TRIPS-Plus provisions, there
is some room to refuse some of the US demands.

The draft of the IP chapter the United States submitted during its negotiations
with Thailand is not the result of a negotiation and thus reﬂects only the US
demands. As such, it affords insight into the types and levels of provisions the
United States requires at a given time—in this case in January 2006. Because the
release of this text results from a leak—the text proposals are otherwise kept
secret—it constitutes an interesting piece of information. Being able to examine
future concluded agreements alongside this text will provide implicit information
about the process and outcomes of negotiations on this issue (e.g. provisions that
may have been refused,
introduction of new demands, etc.). Compared with
previously concluded agreements, this draft clearly shows the highest level of
protection. Thus, it proffers a snapshot of the level of protection ultimately sought,
at this particular time, by the United States-led pro-IP movement.

About the Authors

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian is a Ph.D. candidate at the ENS/EHESS, Ecole Nationale
Superieure/Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris, France; e-mail:
gaelle.krikorian@gmail.com

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

409

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

Dorota M. Szymkowiak is a doctoral student in sociology at Rutgers University,
New Brunswick, USA; e-mail: dszymkowiak@sociology.rutgers.edu

Notes

1 Note that bilateral activities in the ﬁeld of IP include not only FTAs but also BITs that

include IP in their deﬁnition of investment, Bilateral Intellectual Property Rights
Agreements and Memoranda of Understanding on IP.

2 Drahos showed how this mechanism is operating between NAFTA and TRIPS, and
between the BITs and the FTA concluded with Jordan (Drahos, 2001, pp. 799–800). For
more on this topic see also Braithwaite and Drahos (2000).

3 In the case of the FTAA, governments started to release draft texts in July 2001 in

response to the growing criticisms about the secrecy of the process. It is available at
hhttp://www.ftaa-alca.org/FTAADraft03/Index_e.aspi [Accessed on 28 April 2007]. In
the case of Thailand, the text tabled by the US negotiating team was leaked in January
2006, a couple of days after the sixth round of negotiations. It is available at hhttp://
www.bilaterals.org/article.php3?id_article=3677i [Accessed on 28 April 2007]. For
more on the secrecy of negotiating documents, see Katt (2006).

4 The Trade Act H.R. 3009, enacted by the Congress in August 2002, gives the president
the TPA, under which international trade agreements are subject to an up-or-down vote
in Congress, but not amendment. The previous fast track authority had expired just
after the completion of the Uruguay Round in 1994, leaving the president without such
authority. With the TPA in 2002, the USTR was able to get involved in more intense
negotiations and establish very ambitious objectives. These included the Enterprise for
ASEAN Initiative (EAI), announced in October 2002, intended to ‘‘strengthen U.S.
trade and investment ties with [the 10 countries of the] ASEAN both as a region and
bilaterally’’, and the intention, announced in May 2003, to settle the Middle East Trade
Area (MEFTA) by 2013. See Figure 1.

5 The EC is also involved in bilateral or regional negotiations. Partnership agreements

have been signed with several Eastern European and Middle Eastern countries.
Negotiations are currently running with Mercosur, the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) countries, and 79 African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc (ACP) countries in the context
of Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs). Nevertheless, in the past years, bilateral
negotiations were not a priority for the EC, in part because of the fear that such
proceedings could be interpreted as undermining the trade talks of the Doha Round
within the WTO. However, the deadlock faced at the WTO prompted the EC to revise
its strategy (Mayne, 2005, p. 10; South Center and CIEL, 2006). David O’Sullivan,
Commission director-general for trade, explained that ‘‘if Doha was not restarted
within months, it might be a decade or more before a new multilateral agreement
could be reached. Meanwhile bilateral deals are proliferating, not only between the
US and its trading partners but also among developing countries themselves’’
(Fleming, 2006; see also EC, 2006a). Therefore, in October 2006, the EC amended
its priorities to include an increased emphasis on bilateral deals, announcing that
‘‘[it] will propose a new generation of bilateral free trade agreements with key partners
to build on WTO rules by tackling issues which are not ready for multilateral

410

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

discussion and by preparing the ground for the next level of multilateral liberalization’’
(EC, 2006b).

6 International organization of Iceland, Norway, Switzerland and Liechtenstein.
7 Until recently, the language used regarding IP in the EC agreements was often

ambiguous and did not contain multiple provisions as in the US FTAs (except, for
instance, on geographical indications, on which Europeans have been more demanding).
For example, the EC–Morocco agreement states, ‘‘The Parties shall provide suitable and
effective protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights, in line
with the highest international standards’’ (article 39). Drahos notes similar language in
the EC–Mexico FTA (Drahos, 2001, p. 803). Research also notes that the last draft text
prepared by the EC for the negotiations with 15 Caribbean countries promotes
standards that clearly exceed TRIPS (New, 2006).

8 This is often a consequence of technical assistance provided to countries by international
agencies such as WIPO or by other countries promoting high levels of protection. It can
also be the result of unilateral pressures through the US 301 list (see n. 11) or in the
context of the WTO accession of a country. For example, under US pressure, Thailand
was forced to amend its Patent Act to implement TRIPS standards in 1992. As a
‘‘developing country’’, Thailand was indeed allowed to implement TRIPS in 2000 only
(Limpananont, 2005, p. 59; Oxfam, 2001, p. 8). Another US offensive led to further
amendment of the Patent Act in 1999, introducing several TRIPS-Plus provisions.
Current pressures seek additional changes to the Patent Act (WHO, 2004). The 1999
Bangui agreement, which constitutes IP law for 16 countries in West and Central Africa,
was written with the technical assistance of the French National Institute on Intellectual
Property (INPI) and, as a consequence, contains many TRIPS-Plus provisions. In the
process of its WTO accession, China introduced a 6-year term for data exclusivity in its
IP law.

9 Another trend regarding IPR has emerged in the past years. It consists of either (1)
insisting on the existence of ﬂexibilities in the IPR system in order to take into account
social needs and development aspects or (2) promoting alternatives or a complementary
system to the IP one in order to balance it and allow the production and access to
knowledge where the IP system impedes it. Although these new trends are not explored
in this article, it is worth noting that they are in part a reaction to the TRIPS-Plus
pressure of the FTAs. For more on this issue, see, for example, the website available at
hhttp://www.cptech.org/a2k/i [Accessed on 28 April 2007].

10 For example, by excluding pharmaceutical products from the scope of patentable

matters.

11 In 1984, a revision of the Trade Act of 1974 ﬁrst linked IP to trade, including denial of
adequate and effective protection of IPR to the list of actionable unfair foreign practices;
amended again in 1988, the Trade Act gave new strength to section 301. Under the
‘‘Special 301’’ provision, the USTR identiﬁed and sanctioned countries that it considers
‘‘deny adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights, or deny fair and
equitable market access to United States persons that rely on intellectual property
protection’’ (19 U.S.C. section 2242).

12 The United States signed many bilateral agreements on IP during this period: Korea

1986; Poland 1990; Mongolia, Sri Lanka 1991; Albania, Armenia, Czechoslovakia,

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

411

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

China, Romania, Russia, Taiwan 1992; Azerbaijan, Tajikistan 1993; Philippines,
Cambodia, Jamaica, Latvia, Lithuania, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago 1994; China
1995; Peru 1997; Nicaragua 1998. Available at hhttp://www.cptech.org/ip/health/c/
agreements/i [Accessed 28 April 2007].

13 While FTAs also contain provisions on copyright and trademark, the scope of

our research is limited to patent and data exclusivity IP provisions since they are the
most controversial and relevant to access to medical technologies.

14 However, TRIPS-Plus provisions may already be part of the national IP law of the

country, or may be part of other trade agreements or memoranda of understanding
it has signed, as well as treaties it has joined. For example, the IP law in Morocco already
excluded the use of parallel import and restrictions of the grounds to issuing compulsory
licenses before the US FTA was concluded. As another example, Drahos indicates
that, beside the IP chapter, the US–Jordan FTA includes a Memorandum of
Understanding on Issues Related to the Protection of Intellectual Property Rights
(MOU) that requires further limitations (Drahos, 2001, p. 800).

15 Since 1982, US law deﬁnes the term ‘‘process’’ to include ‘‘a new use of a known process,
machine, manufacture, composition of matter, or material’’ (35 U.S.C. ‰ 100(b)). See Burchﬁel
(1989, p. 200). ‘‘Second medical indications’’ are also considered as processes in Europe since
1985 (article 54(5) of the European Patent Convention). See Correa (2000, pp. 21–3).

16 US–Jordan FTA, article 4.22, note 10: ‘‘It is understood that protection for new

chemical entities shall also include protection for new uses for old chemical entities
for a period of three years’’.

17 ‘‘Diagnostic, therapeutic, and surgical procedures’’ are explicitly mentioned as possibly
excluded from patentability in NAFTA (article 1709.3.a), the FTAA draft (section B.2.e.
1.5.h), and the FTAs with Jordan (article 4.18.b), Australia (article 17.9.2), Bahrain
(article 14.8.1) and Oman (article 15.8.1.b).

18 TRIPS speciﬁes that ‘‘Members shall provide for the protection of plant varieties either
by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any combination thereof’’ (article
27.3.b).

19 US–Morocco FTA, article 15.9.2: ‘‘Each Party shall make patents available for the

following inventions: (a) plants and (b) animals. In addition, the Parties conﬁrm that
patents shall be available for any new uses or methods of using a known product,
including new uses of a known product for the treatment of humans and animals’’.

20 US–Chile FTA, article 17.9.2: ‘‘Each Party will undertake reasonable efforts, through a
transparent and participatory process, to develop and propose legislation within 4 years
from the entry into force of this Agreement that makes available patent protection for
plants that are new, involve an inventive step, and are capable of industrial application’’.
21 The IP chapters of these two FTAs are identical (except for the last sentence of article

15.10.c), which suggests that there was no real negotiation on IP between the United
States and Panama.

22 This is the case for NAFTA and will be the case for FTAA if the negotiations are

concluded using the current draft, even if the plant patentability exemption remains
intact.

23 In CAFTA and the FTAs with Chile, Panama and the Andean countries, exceptions are

not listed at all.

412

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

24 FTAA (section B.2.e, article 8.2), Singapore (article 16.7.4), Chile (article 17.9.5),

CAFTA (article 15.9.4), Morocco (article 15.9.5), Australia (article 17.9.5), Bahrain
(article 14.8.4), Oman (article 15.8.4), Peru (article 16.9.4), Colombia (article 16.9.4),
Panama (article 15.9.4), Thailand (patents article 4).

25 But CAFTA and FTAs with Peru, Colombia and Panama stipulate that the revocation
provision is ‘‘without prejudice to article 5.A(3) of the Paris Convention’’ which states
that ‘‘forfeiture of the patent shall not be provided for except in cases where the grant of
compulsory licenses would not have been sufﬁcient to prevent the said abuses’’.

26 The US–Panama agreement—identical

to CAFTA—does not preclude pre-grant

opposition. Neither do the agreements with Peru and Colombia.

27 The Uruguay Round Agreements Act amended 35 U.S.C. ‰ 154 in June of 1995 in order
to comply with the TRIPS requirements. It changed the term of patents ‘‘from ending
seventeen years from the date of patent grant to ending twenty years from the ﬁling date
of the application (or twenty years from the earliest ﬁling date claimed under 35 U.S.C.
‰‰ 120, 121, or 365(c))’’ (USPTO). In 1999, the American Inventors Protection Act
amended 35 U.S.C. ‰ 154(b) to expand the list of administrative delays which may give
rise to patent term adjustment. See also Correa (2006) and Morin (2006).

28 Chile (article 17.9.6), CAFTA (article 15.9.6.a), Morocco (15.9.7), Australia (article

17.9.8.a), Bahrain (article 14.8.6.a), Oman (article 18.5.6.a), Peru (article 16.9.6.a),
Colombia (article 16.9.6.a), Panama (article 15.9.6.a), Thailand draft (patents article 7.a).
29 NAFTA (article 1709.12), Jordan (article 4.23), Singapore (article 16.8.4.a), Chile

(article 17.10.2.a), CAFTA (article 15.9.6.b), Morocco (article 15.10.3), Australia
(article 17.9.8.b), Bahrain (article 14.8.6.b.i), Oman (article 15.8.6.b.i), Peru (article
16.9.6.b), Colombia (article 16.9.6.b), Panama (article 15.9.6.b), Thailand (patents
article 7.b.i). The FTAA does not mention curtailment of the patent term due to
marketing approval but includes several provisions requiring patent extension linked to
marketing approval (section B.2.e, article 5.4; section B.2.j, article 1.4.c).

30 For example, the US–Oman agreement states that:

. . .

With respect to patents covering pharmaceutical products or their method
of use:
(ii) where a Party approves the marketing of a new
pharmaceutical product based on evidence of prior approval in another
including information on safety and efﬁcacy submitted in
territory,
connection with that approval,
the Party shall make available an
adjustment of the patent term to compensate the patent owner for
unreasonable curtailment of the effective patent term in the Party as a
result of the marketing approval process in the other territory and in the
Party (article 15.8.6.b).

31 Notably, protection against unfair commercial use does not necessarily imply the
banning of marketing approval for competitors under TRIPS. See Correa (2002a) and
Musungu and Oh (2006).

32 CAFTA deﬁnes a ‘‘new product’’ as ‘‘one that does not contain a chemical entity that

has been previously approved in the territory of the Party’’ (article 15.10.1.b).

33 Another criterion used by the USTR is the ‘‘lack of an effective coordination system
between . . . health and patent authorities to prevent the issuance of marketing approvals

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

413

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

for unauthorized patent-infringing copies of pharmaceutical products’’ (2006), which is
addressed in the provisions on linkage in the FTAs (see the section ‘‘Linkage between
patent status and market approval’’).

34 Article 30 of TRIPS allows members to provide for limited exceptions to the exclusive
rights conferred by a patent and is also potentially an important ﬂexibility. So far it is
essentially being used to allow experimentations and requests for marketing approval of
a pharmaceutical product before patent expiration so that the generic company can
obtain the approval without delay once the patent has expired (Bolar provision). Article
30 was one option considered to allow export of generic products to countries that have
no or insufﬁcient manufacturing capacities. However, developed countries pushed for a
more restrained and controlled solution (through a waiver of article 31.f). See Correa
(2002b).

35 Such limitations are also present in the US–Vietnam BTA signed in 2000 in order to

establish normal trade relations between the two countries (Fink and Reichenmiller,
2005, p. 2).

36 The failure to work or the insufﬁcient working of the invention is a ground for issuing

compulsory licensing article 5(A) of the Paris Convention and is included in national
laws of some WTO members. The United States brought a case to the WTO against
Brazil on this issue (Elliott, 2000, p. 28), but the complaint was withdrawn in 2001 and
there has been no decision about this issue so far (Vivas-Eugui, 2003, p. 18).

37 FTAA draft, section B.2.e, article 6.1 (b):

The authorization shall be limited to the making, using, or importing of
the patented invention solely to satisfy the requirements of
the
Government use, and shall not entitle a private party acting on behalf
of
to such
authorization to a party other than the Government, or to export the
product outside the territory of the Party . . .

to sell products produced pursuant

the Government

On the contrary, TRIPS, under article 31.f, requires only that ‘‘any such use shall be
authorized predominantly for the supply of the domestic market of the Member
authorizing such use’’.

38 US draft, negotiations with Thailand, patents article 6:

A Party shall not permit the use of the subject matter of a patent without
the authorization of the right holder except in the following circumstances:
(a) to remedy a practice determined after judicial or administrative process
to be anti-competitive under the competition laws of the Party; or
(b) in the case of public non-commercial use or in the case of national
emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency, provided that:

(i) such use is limited to use by the government or third parties authorized
by the government;
(ii) the patent owner is provided with reasonable and entire compensation
for such use; and
(iii) the Party shall not require the patent owner to provide undisclosed
information or technical know-how related to a patented invention that

414

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

has been authorized for use without the consent of the patent owner
pursuant to this paragraph.

Note that this text is very similar to the Australian and almost identical to the
Singaporean.

39 Only NAFTA, the FTAs with Jordan and Trade agreement with Vietnam do not

contain such a provision (Fink and Reichenmiller, 2005).

40 See the USTR press statement about the agreed memorandum of understanding

[online]. Available at hhttp://www.ustr.gov/Document_Library/Press_Releases/2004/
July/US_Canada_Agree_to_Assist_Poor_Countries_Access_to_Medicine.htmli
[Accessed on April 2007].

41 US–Morocco FTA, article 10.27, deﬁnitions:

. . .
investment means every asset that an investor owns or controls,
directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an investment,
including such characteristics as the commitment of capital or other
resources, the expectation of gain or proﬁt, or the assumption of risk.
Forms that an investment may take include: . . . (f) intellectual property
rights; (g) licenses, authorizations, permits, and similar rights conferred
pursuant to domestic law; and (h) other tangible or intangible, movable or
immovable property, and related property rights,
leases,
mortgages, liens, and pledges.

such as

42 US–Morocco FTA, article 10.6.5:

This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted
in relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the TRIPS
Agreement, or to the revocation, limitation, or creation of intellectual
property rights, to the extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation, or
creation is consistent with Chapter Fifteen (IPR).

Article 10.8.3:

. . . (b) Paragraph 1(f) does not apply: (i) when a Party authorizes use of an
intellectual property right in accordance with Article 31 of the TRIPS
Agreement, or to measures requiring the disclosure of proprietary
information that fall within the scope of, and are consistent with,
Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement.

For more on this issue, see Fink and Reichenmiller (2005, p. 7).

43 Issued in February 2007, the reaction of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers’
Association of Thailand (PReMA) to the issuing of three compulsory licenses by the Thai
government provides a good example of the type of statement the industry can make in
such a situation. It reads:

We are gravely concerned for Thailand’s reputation as a country that
respects the rule of law and the sanctity of private property. When
governments resolve to take away the property of the private sector,
they need to begin with consultation and end with the consent of the

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

415

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

the reassurances of

property owner. These unilateral actions by the Ministry of Public Health
contradict
the Prime Minister to the foreign
investment community, are inconsistent with the Board of Investment’s
(BOI) policy to promote research & development activities in Thailand,
and may shut Thailand out of one of the global economy’s most important
growth sectors—biotechnology and life sciences (PreMA, 2007).

44 TRIPS, article 6: ‘‘For the purposes of dispute settlement under this Agreement, . . .

nothing in this Agreement shall be used to address the issue of the exhaustion of
intellectual property rights’’.

45 NAFTA (article 1709.12), FTAA (section B.2.e, article 5.4, section B.2.j, article 1.4.c),

Jordan (article 4.23.a), Singapore (article 16.8.4.a), Chile (article 17.10.2.a), CAFTA
(article 15.9.6.b), Morocco (article 15.10.3), Australia (article 17.9.8.b), Bahrain (article
14.8.6.b.i and ii), Oman (article 15.8.6.b.i and ii), Peru (article 16.9.6.b), Colombia
(article 16.9.6.b), Panama (article 15.9.6.b), Thailand (patents article 7.b.i and ii).

46 FTAA (section B.2.j, article 1.4.b), Singapore (article 16.8.3), Morocco (15.10.1, note

12), Australia (article 17.10.3), Bahrain (article 14.9.3), Oman (article 15.9.3), Peru
(article 16.10.2), Colombia (article 16.10.2), Thailand (measures related to certain
regulated products, article 3). This provision does not appear in NAFTA, CAFTA, and
the FTAs with Jordan, Chile and Panama.

47 FTAA (section B.2.e, article 5.4.c), Jordan (article 4.23.b), Singapore (article 16.8.4.b),

Chile (article 17.10.2.b), CAFTA (article 15.10.2.b), Morocco (article 15.10.4.b),
Australia (article 17.10.4.b.ii), Bahrain (article 14.9.4.b), Oman (article 15.9.4.b), Peru
(article 16.10.3.b), Colombia (article 16.10.3.b), Panama (article 15.10.2.b), Thailand
(measures related to certain regulated products, article 4.b).

48 As Rius Sanjuan notes, under US law (21 U.S.C. section 355(b)(1)):

linkage is applied through the publication of ‘‘Approved Drug Products
with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations’’, commonly known as the
Orange Book. This publication identiﬁes drug products approved on the
basis of safety and effectiveness by the FDA. Pioneer drug applicants are
required to ﬁle with the FDA the number and expiration date of any
patent which claims the drug that is the subject of the application, or a
method of using such drug (Rius Sanjuan, 2006, p. 2).

References

Abbott, F. (2004) The Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health and the
Contradictory Trend in Bilateral and Regional Free Trade Agreements, Occasional Paper
14, April. Friends World Committee for Consultation (QUAKERS).

Abbott, F. (2006) Intellectual Property Provisions of Bilateral and Regional Trade Agreements

in Light of U.S. Federal Law. International Centre for Trade and Sustainable
Development, UNCTAD, Geneva.

Braithwaite, J. and Drahos, P. (2000) Global Business Regulation. Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge.

Burchﬁel, K. J. (1989) ‘Revising the ‘‘Original’’ Patent Clause: Pseudohistory in Constitutional

Construction’, Harvard Journal of Law and Technology, 2(Spring Issue), 156–218.

416

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

IPR in the Making

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

Correa, C. (2000) Integrating Public Health Concerns into Patent Legislation in Developing

Countries. South Center, Geneva.

Correa, C. (2002a) Protection of Data Submitted for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals:

Implementing the Standards of the TRIPS Agreement. South Centre and WHO, Geneva.

Correa, C. (2002b) ‘Implications of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and

Public Health’, Health Economics and Drugs. EDM Series, 3(12), 28–30.

Correa, C. (2006) Provisions in Free Trade Agreements that May Affect Access to Medicines in

Developing Countries. CEIDIE-University of Buenos Aires, 18 May.

Drahos, P. (2001) ‘BITs and BIPs—Bilateralism in Intellectual Property’, Journal of World

Intellectual Property, 4(6), 791–808.

Drahos, P. (2002) Developing Countries and International Intellectual Property Standard-
Setting [online]. Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, London. Available at
hhttp://www.iprcommission.org/papers/pdfs/study_papers/sp8_drahos_study.pdfi
[Accessed on April 2007].

Elliott, R. (2000) ‘US ﬁles WTO Complaints Against Brazil Over Requirement for ‘‘Local

Working’’ of Patents’, HIV/AIDS Policy Law Review, 5(4), 28.

European Commission (2006a) Global Europe: Competing in the world. Speaking points by

Commissioner Mandelson. 4 October [online]. Available at hhttp://ec.europa.eu/commission_
barroso/mandelson/speeches_articles/sppm117_en.htmi [Accessed on April 2007].

European Commission (2006b) New Strategy Puts EU Trade Policy at Service of European

Competitiveness and Economic Reform [online]. DG Trade Release: Trade and
competitiveness, Brussels, 4 October. Available at hhttp://ec.europa.eu/trade/issues/
sectoral/competitiveness/pr041006_en.htmi [Accessed on April 2007].

Fink, C. and Reichenmiller, P. (2005) Tightening TRIPS: The Intellectual Property Provisions
of Recent US Free Trade Agreements, Trade Note 20. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Fleming, S. (2006) ‘EU Seeks to Complete Trade Deals in Two Years’, European Voice

[online], 12(44). Available at hhttp://www.bilaterals.org/article.php3?id_article=6612i
[Accessed on April 2007].

Katt, W. J. (2006) ‘The New Paper Chase: Public Access to Trade Agreement Negotiating

Documents’, Columbia Law Review, 106, 679–707.

Kuanpoth, J. (2003) ‘The Political Economy of the TRIPS Agreement: Lessons from Asian

Countries’, in C. Bellmann, G. Dutﬁeld and R. Mel ´endez-Ortiz (eds), Trading in
Knowledge: Development Perspectives on TRIPS, Trade and Sustainability. Earthscan
Publications, London, pp. 45–56.

Limpananont, J. (2005) ‘Impact of U.S.–Thailand FTA in Access to Medicines in Thailand’,

in Free Trade Agreements: Impact in Thailand. FTA Watch, Nonthaburi, pp. 57–72.
Mayne, R. (2005) Regionalism, Bilateralism, and ‘‘TRIP Plus’’ Agreements: The Threat to
Developing Countries, Human Development Report Ofﬁce, Occasional paper. UNDP,
Geneva.

Morin, J.-F. (2006) ‘Tripping up TRIPS Debates: IP and Health in Bilateral Agreements’,

International Journal of Intellectual Property Management, 1(1–2), 37–53.

Musungu, S. and Oh, C. (2006) The Use of Flexibilities in TRIPS by Developing Countries:

Can they Promote Access to Medicines. South Center and WHO, Geneva.

New, W. (2006) EU-Caribbean Agreement Shows Escalated IP Provisions [online]. IP Watch,

17 November. Available at hhttp://www.ip-watch.org/weblog/index.php?p=463&res
=1024_ff&print=0i [Accessed on April 2007].

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5

417

Gae¨ lle P. Krikorian and Dorota M. Szymkowiak

IPR in the Making

Oxfam (2001) ‘The Impact on Patent Rules on the Treatment of HIV/AIDS in Thailand’,

Country Proﬁle. Oxfam, London.

Oxfam (2006) ‘Song of the Sirens, Why the US–Andean FTAs Undermine Sustainable

Development and Regional Integration’. Oxfam International Brieﬁng Paper, June,
p. 14.

Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers Association (2007) Statement from the

President of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers’ Association of Thailand
(PReMA), 17 February.

Rossi, F. (2006) ‘Free Trade Agreements and TRIPS-Plus Measures’, International Journal of

Intellectual Property Management, 1(1–2), 150–72.

Rius Sanjuan, J. (2006) Patent-Registration Linkage, CPTech Discussion Paper No. 2, April.
Rius Sanjuan, J., Love, J. and Weissman, R. (2006) Protection of Pharmaceutical Test Data:

A Policy Proposal [online]. Consumer Project on Technology, 21 November.
Available at hhttp://www.cptech.org/ip/health/data/CPTech-Test-Data.pdfi [Accessed
on April 2007].

Schott, J. (2004) Assessing US FTA Policy. Free Trade Agreements. Institute for International

Economics, Washington, DC, pp. 359–81.

Sell, S. (2003) Private Power, Public Law: The Globalization of Intellectual Property Rights.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

South Center and CIEL (2006) Intellectual Property Quarterly Update [online], Third

Quarter, 13. Available at hhttp://www.ciel.org/Publications/pubipqu.htmli [Accessed on
April 2007].

Tyson, K. L. and Bahr, R. W. (undated) Patent Term Guarantee Overview [online]. US Patent
and Trademark Ofﬁce. Available at hhttp://www.uspto.gov/web/ofﬁces/dcom/olia/aipa/
patent_term_guarantee.htmi [Accessed on April 2007].

United States Trade Representative (2005) Special 301 Report [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.ustr.gov/assets/Document_Library/Reports_Publications/2005/2005_Special_301/
asset_upload_ﬁle948_7645.pdfi [Accessed on April 2007].

United States Trade Representative (2006) Special 301 Report [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.ustr.gov/Document_Library/Reports_Publications/2006/2006_Special_301_Review/
Section_Index.htmli [Accessed 28 April 2007].

Vivas-Eugui, D. (2003) Regional and Bilateral Agreements and a TRIPS-Plus World: The Free

Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA). TRIPS Issues Papers 1, Quaker United Nations
Ofﬁce, Quaker International Affairs Program, International Centre for Trade and
Sustainable Development, Geneva.

Weissman, R. (2004) Comments on the Intellectual Property Chapter of the US–Morocco Free

Trade Agreement and the Impact on Access to Medicines [online], April. Available at
hhttp://www.cptech.org/ip/health/c/morocco/weissman04082004.htmli [Accessed on
April 2007].

World Health Organization (2004) Review of patent legislation or India, Indonesia, Sri Lank
and Thailand. Measures to Safeguard Public Health [online], September. WHO, Regional
Ofﬁce for South-East Asia. Available at hhttp://www.searo.who.int/LinkFiles/
Reports_HSD-275-Patent.pdfi [Accessed on November 2007].

418

r 2007 The Authors. Journal Compilation r 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2007) Vol. 10, no. 5


