Trade in Electronic Commerce Services under 

the WTO 

The Need  to Clearly Classify Electronic Transmissions as 

Services and  Not  TartEf-Liable 

Ernest0 HERNANDEZ-L~PEZ* 

Should the World Trade Organization classifjr electronic transmissions as a service, 
and thus tariff-free under the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), or should 
the WTO classifjr electronic transmissions as a good, and thus subject to tariffi under the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)? 

This  article  dlscusses  two  important  issues:  first, whether,  for  the  sake of  legal 
certainty, the WTO should take the appropriate steps to definitively classifjr electronic 
transmissions as a service and as not tariff-liable.’ Not tariff-liable means that a good is 
not subject to customs duties. Electronic transmission refers to “digitahzed information 
transmitted  by  electronic  means.”2  Because  they  imply  an  exchange  of  digital 
information, electronic transmissions are a dynamic, highly technical, and evolving form 
of cross-border  transactions.  Second, it  explores how,  if  electronic transmissions are 
defined as a service, WTO Members will be able to benefit from eventual liberalization 
in the service sector. 

* J.D.  (The  George  Washington  University  Law  School);  M.A.  (Georgetown  University).  Served  as  an 
International  Relations  Professor  at  the  Universidad  del  Rosario  and  as a  Political Science  Professor  of  the 
Universidad Javeriana, both in Santaf2 de Bogoti, Colombia. 

Thanks are due to Professor John Spanogle for his comments, patience, and suggestions regarding this article, 
and “Skip” Jones and the staff of the Office of Multilateral Main of the U S .  Department of Commerce, as well 
as  Professors  Raj  Bhala  and  Stanimar Alexandrov  for  their  guidance  in  teaching  him  about  the  Wto.  Any 
perspectives presented  in  this  article solely  reflect the  opinions  of the  author.  Any  comments  may  be sent to: 
ccernestoh@gwu.edun. 

“Tariff-liable’’ means that a good is subject to tariff duties. Accordingly, a government may charge a tariff on 
a good, if it is tariff-liable.  Tariffs are:  “A schedule or system of duties imposed by a government  on imported or 
exported  goods. In the United States, tariffs are imposed on imported goods only.”: see Black’s Law Dictionary, 
West Publishing Co., St. Paul, Minnesota, 1999, at 1468. A certain kind of tariff is a customs duty. A customs duty 
is  “a  duty levied on an imported or exported commodity, especially the federal tax levied on goods shpped into 
the United States.”: see Blacks Law Dictionary, ibid., 523. For the sake ofbrevity this study uses tariffs and customs 
duties synonymously, although there are other types of tariff duties, such as antidumping tariff duties, discriminatory 
tariff duties, redatory tariff duties, etc. 
*  See WTO Council for  Trade  in  Goods, Work  Programme  on Electronic  Commerce  (hereinafter  Work 
Programme  I).  26 July  1999, G/C/W/158,  at  para.  2.2(iv).  This  article  treats  “electronic  transmission” as  a 
transaction between  a customer and a supplier, and applies trade law to t h s  transaction to see how the transaction 
is  classified  as a  “trade in goods”  or “trade  in  services”. It asks how the WTO will  treat  cross-border  trade  in 
electronic transmission, the electronic transmission a customer receives and the digitalized information by electronic 
means. This could be via the Internet, wire, or intranet. It is not necessary for the offer and assent ofthis transaction 
to be done via electronic means, although typically it is; it is only necessary for the transmission of the information 
(service of good) to be done electronically. Examples include downloading documents on the World Wide Web 
in pdf, html, or word processor format, music in MP3 format, or images in quicktime format. 

558 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Section I  of the article reports on the current state of confusion and indecision in 
the WTO surrounding the issue of whether all electronic transmissions are services and 
whether  electronic  transmissions  are  customs-duty-free?  Section  II  presents  the 
various  perspectives  in  the  electronic  transmissions  debate.  This  debate  refers  to 
whether  electronic  transmissions are a good or a service. There is  a discussion of the 
arguments for classification as a good and for classification as a service, justifications for 
applying  customs  duties and  reasons to not apply customs duties,  and  contemporary 
examples  of  U.S.  law  which  define  “goods”  and  determine  the  tax  liability  of 
e-commerce.  Section III  examines how electronic  transmissions fall within  the  GATS 
legal framework.  Initially, hypothetical  examples  are given  to present  what potential 
scenarios may  develop  from  the  legal  issues raised  in  this  article.  Next,  there  is  an 
analysis of the  GATS four-mode  legal framework,  requirements  for specific Member 
commitments,  and  the on-going  services-trade  negotiations.  Section  IV presents  the 
conclusions. 

Electronic transmission can be seen as a good or as a service. From one perspective, 
a number  of electronic transmissions  have  qualities similar, if not identical,  to  goods. 
Electronic  transmissions  such  as  downloadable  music,  books,  movies,  newspapers, 
documents  and  computer  programs  share  many  qualities  with  physical  goods.  The 
consumer does not receive  a dfferent product.  Alternatively,  electronic  transmissions 
can  be  seen  as  a  service.  The  customer  purchases  or  uses  the  service  of attaining 
electronic information.4  Considering  these  varying positions,  this article refers to this 
issue as the “electronic transmission debate”. 

Because electronic  transmissions are a  dynamic and  evolving type  of transaction, 
the WTO should classify them as a service. With this classification, the WTO’S complex 
legal framework for services can adapt to the evolving technological nature of electronic 
transmissions.  If  electronic  transmissions  are  not  defined  as  a  service,  Members  will 
remain  debating  the  characterization  of  cross-border  electronic  transmissions.  This 
debate  will  delay  and  stall  any  substantive  liberalization  for  trade  in  electronic 
transmissions services. 

3  The WTO does  not  define  goods;  instead  it  relies on Members  to  apply tariffs  to  goods  in  their  Tariff 
Schedule. The GATS Agreement does not define “services”; instead it defines “trade in services”; see Section IILA, 
below. 

4  The typical transaction could be either: (1) a licence which permits the customer to make and use a copy of 
the computer program; or (2) purchasing the service of using the computer program which is  online.  For  either 
one of these contracts, the issue of whether there is a service or good applies. The reasoning is  that the lack of a 
customs ducy being applied would motivate a government to make the determination of whether it is a good or a 
service. A more sophisticated analysis would stress the issue of the intellectual property aspect of the transaction. 
Computer programs, literature, images and music benefit tiom such intellectual property protection as copyrights, 
trademarks and patents. It could be argued that the transaction is not a transfer of goods because the customer only 
attains a right to use the intellectual property. Without any tangible exchange, the transfer ofthese rights is a service. 
Nonctheless, the end result of the transaction-a  book, music, or text-motivates 
governments to make the central 
enquiry of this article. 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER THE WTO 

5 59 

I.  THE CURIlENT STATE OF ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSIONS 

IN THE WTO: A LACK OF 

CLARITY 

Currently, the WTO has failed to extend a moratorium on applying customs duties 
to electronic transmis~ions.~ The WTO agreed to a temporary moratorium on applying 
customs duties to electronic transmissions in 1998.(j This issue was to be decided at the 
WTO’S Third Ministerial Meeting in  Seattle in  the f d  of  3999.7 With  the  failure to 
launch a new negotiating round, the Ministerial was unable to discuss the issue.* Since 
then,  WTO  Members  have  been  unable  to  extend  or  to  make  permanent  the 
moratorium on applying customs duties to electronic  transmission^.^ At present, WTO 
Members have no legal obligation to apply or to not apply customs duties to electronic 
transmissions.10  However, with the  current business  enthusiasm for e-commerce,  the 
increasing importance of electronic transmissions and the complex nature of the GATS 
Agreement,  the  WTO  should  eliminate  any  uncertainties  and  declare  electronic 
transmissions a service, and therefore customs-duty-free. 

The WTO is  currently  analysing how  e-commerce  fits  within  the  various legal 
benefits  and  obligations presented by  a variety of WTO Agreements. A  part  of  this 
e-commerce  enquiry is the electronic transmission debate. At present, Members are not 
obligated to apply or to not apply customs duties to electronic transmission transactions. 
Following  the  1999  Seattle  Ministerial,  there  has  not  been  any  extension  or 
confirmation of the moratorium on applying customs duties to electronic transmissions. 
Many Members have dfferent perspectives regarding the moratorium. Some Members 
contend that the moratorium is still in effect, while others contend that it lapsed with 
the failure of extension at Seattle.” Nonetheless, no Member has declared its intention 
to  impose  customs  on  e-commerce  transactions.  Regardless  of there  being  no  clear 
determination by the WTO, there is still the possibility for a Member to apply customs 
duties to electronic transmissions. 

1998. 

5  See Electronic Commerce, BNA Int’l Trade Daily, 5 December 2000. 

See WTO, Tbe  Geneva Ministerial  Declaration  on  Global  Electronic  Conrmerce, WT/MIN(98)/DEc/2,  25  May 

7  See Infomation Technology, BNA Int’l Trade Reptr, 6 October 1999. 
8  See  Electronic  Commerce,  supra,  footnote  5;  WTO Postpones  Seattle  Po’ost-Mortem, BNA Int’l  Trade  Daily, 

20 December 1999; E-Commerce, BNA Int’l Trade Daily,  15 November 1999. 

9  Id. 
10  This argument stems &om the fact that: (1) there have not been specific c-commerce sector negotiations in 
the GATS; and (2) the moratorium on customs duties application has not been renewed.  Alternatively, it may be 
argued that the GATS imposed a prohibition  on tariffs for  all services. Thus, because electronic  transmission is a 
service, Members enjoy the bencfit of having trade in this service free from tanffs. With this,  Members have  the 
de fact0 obligation to not impose a customs duty. 

‘ 1   See Electronic Commerce, BNA Int’l Trade Daily, 14 December 2000: explaining that the United States insists 
that the moratorium is in effect, while developing countries contend that it has lapsed. Infrmation  Technology, BNA 
Int’l Trade Daily, 6 October 1999: explaining that despite much support amongst Memben, the moratorium will 
most  likely  not  be  permanent,  and  India,  Malaysia  and  Mexico  were  non-committal,  “arguing  that  further 
clarification was needed on what transactions will be covered by the moratorium.” 

560 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The  most  recent  development  has  been  the  establishment  of  a  formal  “Work 
Programme on Electronic Commerce” by the WTO General Council on 17 July 2000.12 
This was an important step, as e-commerce  issues had been stalled for nearly two years 
following  the  Third  Ministerial.’3 Previous  WTO work  on  e-commerce  was  done 
informally, and  not  necessarily under  the  supervision  of the  General  Council.14 The 
current programme invites the four WTO subsirnary bodies-the  Council for Trade in 
Goods, Council for Trade in Services, Council for Trade-Related  Aspects of Intellectual 
Property  Rights  (TRIPS), and  the  Committee  on  Trade  and  Development-to 
independently  examine  how  e-commerce  fits  within  their  focus  sectors.  The  four 
bodies are to report at the General Council’s regular meetings.15 This Work Programme 
builds on previous work done within the Council for Trade in Goods.16 Established in 
July 1999, this latter view includes: 

‘‘- 
- 

market access for and access to products related to electronic commerce; 
valuation issues arising from the  application of the Agreement on Implementation of 
Article VII of the GATT 1994; 

-  issues arising from the application of the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures; 
-  customs duties and other duties and charges as defined under Article II  of GATT  1994; 
-  standards in relation to electronic commerce; 
-  rules of origin issues; and 
-  classification issues.”17 
Classification issues represents the most important concern for this article, as they 
relate to the decision as to whether an electronic transmission is a good or a service, i.e. 
the electronic transmission debate. 

11.  THE ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION DEBATE 

Currently,  the  WTO has  decided  to  classify  cross-border  transactions  via  the 
Internet  as  “trade  in  services”,  and  they  thus  fall  under  the  G A T S . ~ ~  The  GATS is 
technology-neutral, 
i.e.  it  does  not  “distinguish  between  technological  means  of 
delivery.!’19  Personal  delivery,  delivery  by  boat,  delivery  by  airplane,  or  electronic 
delivery of services all fall under the GATS. Accordingly, most WTO Members propose 
that  “all  the  provisions  of  the  GATS apply  to  trade  in  services  through  electronic 
means.”20 Regarding most e-commerce  services, there is little disagreement about their 
legal status as a service. 

l2  See WTO Council  for  Trade in  Goods, Chairman’sfoctuo/  progress  report  to  the  General  Council  on  the  Work 

Programme  on Electronic Commerce,  24 November 2000, G/L/421,  at  1. 

13  See Electronic  Commerce,  supra, footnote 5. 
l4  See Chairman’sfactrcal progress report, supra, footnote 12. 
15  Id. 
16  Id. 
l 7   Ibid., at 3. 
l8  See  WTO,  Electronic Commerce:  Briefing  Note, available at:  ~chttp:www.wto.org/eng~~sh/tratop~e/ecorn~e/ 

ecom_briehote-e.htmn,  viewed on 19 April 2001. 

Iq  Id. 
Id. 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER THE WTO 

561 

There is, however, disagreement about the “classification” of the specific form of 
e-commerce  called  electronic  transmi~sion.~’ Electronic  transmission  refers  to 
“digitahzed information transmitted by electronic means”.22 These transmissions can be 
viewed as a good or as a service. In order to make sense of this issue, this study presents 
below the arguments made by Members stressing: 

- 

- 

- 

- 

classification  as a service @A); 
classification  as a good (ILB); 
applying customs duties (KC);  and 
not applying customs duties (ILD). 

The first two sub-sections address the substantive legal issue of classification, while 
the latter two analyse the logistical problems of customs-duty application. As part of an 
effort to draw external legal  influence, this section concludes with  an  examination of 
how U.S. contract law and U.S. e-commerce regulations define goods and services and 
how they apply tax liability to e-commerce transactions (II.E). 

Electronic transmissions refer  to the possibility of a  consumer obtaining a book, 
text, software, or music via  electronic means. Examples include downloading a book 
from the  Internet,  a  computer program  from  a  host  server, or  an MP3 file  from an 
electronic bulletin board. 

From the  service perspective, Members argue that  the consumer is  only using a 
service which, for instance, permits the consumer to make a copy of the book.23 From 
this perspective, there is no actual physical product exchange, there is only an exchange 
of digital information. That is, there is only the use  of service/information to make a 
product. 

From the goods perspective, Members contend that  the consumer electronically 
attains a product identical to an actual physical good.24 This position emphasizes that the 
electronic transmission facilitates the delivery of a physical good, such as a book.25 

It  is  contended  here  that  this  debate  is  fuelled  by  economic  and  sovereignty 
interests.  Governments  have  the  authority  to  apply  customs  duties.  A  multilateral 

21  See Chairman’s Factual Progress Report, supra, footnote 12, at para. 3; Work  Programme on Electronic Commerce 
Progress  Report  to  the  General  Council  (hereinafter  Work  Programme rI), 27 July  1999, S/L/74,  at  para.  24;  Work 
Programme  I,  supra,  footnote 2,  at  S u m .  2;  §  2; Council for  Trade  in  Services,  Work  Programme on  Electronic 
Commerce (hereinafter Work  Programme III)  S/C/8, 31 March 1999, at 5; General Council, Preparationsfor  the  1999 
Mitiisierial Cortferenre Work  Progranime on Electronic Commerce,  Communicationfrom Indonesia and Singapore (hereinafter 
Preparafions), 9 July  1999, WT/GC/W/247,  at  paras.  10-13; General Council, Interim  Review  ofProgress  in  the 
Implementation ofthe  Work  Programme on Electronic Commerce, 14 April 1999, WT/GC/24,  at § 2; Council for Trade 
in Goods, Work Programme on Ekctronic Commerce, Background Note by the Secretariaf (hereinafter Work Programme IY), 
5 November 1998, G/C/W/128,  at para. 1.2. 

22  See Work  Propamme  I ,  supra, footnote 2, at para. 2.2(iv). 
23  Ibid., at para. 2.4. 
24  Ibid., at para. 2.6. 
25  Id. 

562 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

decision  to  not  apply  customs  duties  translates  into  a  sovereign  ceding  some  of  its 
authority.  The  GATS prohibits  applying  tariffs  to  services,  while  under  the  GATT, 
Members  may  subject goods to customs duties. Accordingly,  some Members feel that 
electronic transmissions offer consumers a means of avoiding paying customs duties on 
articles such as music recorhngs on CDs, or books. With this, governments lose much- 
needed funds. Despite participation  in global free trade, many countries receive a major 
part  of  their  government  funds  from  tariff.  Alternatively,  other  Members  regard 
electronic  transmissions as an example of free trade. Here, there  is commercial activity 
which  is  not subject to government intervention.  Similarly, many  nations are hesitant 
to  cede their authority  to apply customs duties.  Nations  often regard  this authority as 
their sovereign right. 

It is further contended here that the debate is exacerbated by duelling multilateral 
negotiation positions intrinsic to the WTO. The electronic transmission debate fits in as 
a  part  of  a  variety  of trade  negotiations  which  each  Member  conducts.  The WTO 
represents  a  series  of  multilateral  negotiations  in  many  economic  sectors,  such  as 
agriculture and services, where consensus has not been reached.26 Some Members, such 
as the United States and the European Union, seek the initiation of a new round of trade 
negotiations.  Other  Members  prefer  to  not  proceed  with  further  such  negotiations. 
Both camps, though, need other Members to build alliances and consensus in the WTO 
Ministerials and in the  actual trade  negotiations.  With  so many  negotiation  positions, 
the electronic transmission debate becomes a bargaining chip within larger issues, such 
as the start of a new round, negotiating the Agreement on Agriculture  and revising the 
Anti-Dumping  Agreement.  Accordingly,  this  multilateral  bargaining  exacerbates  the 
indecision and ambiguity surrounding electronic transmissions. 

A.  WITH NO  TANGIBLE GOODS  TRANSFERRED,  ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSIONS ARE  A 

SERVICE 

Some  WTO Members  present  four  main  arguments  for  classifjing  electronic 

transmissions as services. These arguments stress that the GATS: 

-  is technology-neutral; 
- 

information is exchanged not products; 
electronic transmissions are customizable; and 
digitalized information  does not require a physical or tangible form. 

- 

- 

2h  Examples  of these  WTO Treaties  include areas  such  as:  textiles,  agriculture, sanitary and phytosanitary 
measures, technical barriers  to  trade, subsidies and  countervailing measures,  antidumping,  safeguards, rules  of 
origin,  customs  valuation, import licensing,  State  trading  enterprises,  information  technology products  (ITA), 
trade  facilitation  services,  intellectual  property,  TRIPS, trade  policy  reviews,  government  procurement, 
transparency  working, investment and  trade,  balance  of payments, competition  policy,  electronic commerce, 
environment, development,  regionalism,  and  dispute  settlement.  See  WTO, WTO Trade  Topics,  available at: 
((http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/tratop_e.htm)), viewed on 21 April 2001. 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER THE W T O  

563 

First, the strongest argument for classification of electronic transmissions as a service 
is that the GATS is technology-neutral;27 it does not dstinguish between what form of 
technology  is  used  to deliver  a service.28  Electronic  transmissions involve  a digital or 
non-physical manifestation of exchange. The similarity of dgital information with actual 
goods is irrelevant,  because information  does not have actual physical attributes like a 
good; information only permits the customer to make something, such as a good. The 
GATS encompasses all trade in services; the WTO Secretariat notes that “the reach of the 
GATS rules extends to all forms of international trade in services.”29 With this mind-set, 
electronic transmissions are no different from other services, and thus the GATS applies. 
Second,  electronic  transmissions  transmit  digital information,  as  opposed  to  any 
physical  product.30  Here,  there 
is  a  distinction  between  the  data  (digitalized 
information) and the product  (music CD, book, or magazine). Often Members refer to 
the product as the carrier of the data.31 The carrier is tariff-liable, while the data is n0t.32 
With an electronic transmission, there is an exchange of data or information. This data 
is digitalized. Nothing physical or tangible is exchanged. Because information is not a 
physical product, electronic transmission cannot be classified as a good. 

Indonesia and Singapore explain this point: 
“Books, music, and software are not themselves new commercial products. It is just that prior 
to the advent of e-commerce, they were treated as goods because they had to be delivered 
in  the form of a  carrier  media, be  it paper,  cassettes, etc., and  those  carrier  media  were 
classified  as  goods.  Now  that  those  forms  of  tangible  carrier  mediums  are  no  longer 
necessary  maybe  what  we  need  to  consider  is  whether the  software  and  music  would 
continue to classify as goods, or it might be more appropriate for them to be classified as 
services.”33 
Third, the  ability to  adapt  or customize  electronic  transmissions precludes  their 
classification  as  a  good.34 With  electronic  transmissions, there  is  not  a  single  good 
exchanged. Instead, a service is provided to create a customized set of data. Digitalized 
information permits a recipient  to alter the form, structure, size and applicability of the 
final product.  For instance, a recipient may download only one section of a text, may 
decide to not download all files included in an application, or may retrieve only sections 
of a CD or sections of a song. This changeable nature of the transmission supports the 

27  See Work  Programme rI,  supra, footnote 21, at para. 6; Work  Programme 111,  supra, footnote 21, at para. 4. The 
GATT is  not technology-neutral,  but all goods to  which  the GATT applies must be  classified in the Harmonised 
System (HS). Accordingly, only technologies in a Member’s Tariff Schedule are subject to tariffs. 

28  Specifically, the GATS provides some general obligations which Members must afford to “trade in services” 
&om other Memben.  For further  liberalization, Members must  reach specific commitments  on specific sectors. 
Accordingly, one sector of “trade in services”  may benefit &om more liberalized treatment  than  another sector 
because the specific commitments vary. In this respect, all service sectors do not benefit from the same liberalization. 
For instance, there may be more liberahzed treatment  given to trade in financial services as compared to trade in 
legal services, because the specific commitments relating to financial services are more liberal. 

z9  See WTO Secretariat, An Introduction to the GATS, Trade in Services Division, October 1999, at para.  1.1. 
3u  See Work  Programme I ,  supra, footnote 2, at para. 2.6. 
3’  See Preparations, supra, footnote 21, at para.  11. 
32  Id. 
33  Id. 
34  See Work  Programme I ,  rupra, footnote 2, at para. 2.8. 

564 

THE JOURNAL  OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

service  argument,  because  the  transmission’s  end  result  can  be  changed.  With  this 
customized  nature,  the  transaction  never  results  in  one  single type  of product.  The 
Council for Trade in Goods elaborates: 

“The  inherently  ‘customizable’  nature  of  many  digital  products  would  argue  against 
classifylng  them  as  traditional goods.  The number  of  new  categories of  products made 
possible by digitalization was limitless.”35 
Fourth,  the intangible or non-permanent  nature  of &gitalized information suggests 
that it is not a good.36 With this changing nature, it becomes difficult to classiG an electronic 
transmission as  one lund of good. Digidzed information, such as software, text or mgital 
music, is not fixed or tangible. Digital information exists as ideas, yet it is not necessary for 
them to be tangible for them to have any value. This non-fixed  or non-permanent  nature 
suggests that they resemble a service. This is because it is in the information that the value 
lies. Digitalized information may only resemble a good ifit is stored in a physical form, such 
as a dlskette or paper copy. The Council for Trade in Goods explains: 

“AU digitalized products could be  traded over the Internet, and while some products, e.g. 
software or music,  could be  stored on a carrier media  after being received electronically 
(thus approximating a good), a carrier media was, in many cases, unnecessary.”37 

B.  WITH A  RESULT  THAT  IS IDENTICAL TO A  GOOD,  AN ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION 

IS  A GOOD 

Some Members argue that electronic transmissions should be classified as  goods.38 
The central argument  for such  classification is  that  the end  result of a transmission is 
identical to a physical g00d.39  Here, observers note in some instances that transmission 
of digitalized information  provides  recipients  with  something  which  is  not  different 
from  a  tangible  version  of the  inf~rrnation.~~ This  similarity suggests that  goods  are 
exchanged via electronic transmissions. The Council for Trade in Goods reports: 

“Examples given in this context related to music downloaded from the Internet in the form 
of digitalized data  v e m s  a physical  CD purchased in a  shop. In  the  circumstances where 
software downloaded from the Internet was a perfect substitute for the software on a disk 
or CD ...”41 

35  See  ibid., at  para. 2.8.  This argument rests  on the reasoning  that  the mutabte  nature of electronic  data 
permits an  endless variety of end-products.  This makes it impossible to classify an electronic  transmission as  one 
product.  This argument is  weakened  however, by  current  goods which  are  “customizable”.  Products  such  as 
jewellery, cars, clothes, shoes, and many others come in many shapes and sizes. Yet they are able to be classified as 
a good. 

36  The key  element here is that  data is intangible.  It  cannot be touched or carried away. It does not have a 
physical composition. Some goods may not be permanent, but they are tangible. For instance, agricultural products, 
if left alone, will decay and cease to exist eventually. They are non-permanent. Initially, and even in decomposition, 
these goods are tangible. They have a physical element. 

37  See Work  f i o p m m e  I ,  supra, footnote 2, at para. 2.8. 
38  Ibid., at para. 2.6. 
39  Id. 
40  Id. 
41  Id. 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER THE WTO 

565 

Another  argument  stresses  that  mass  electronic  dstribution  of  data  should  be 
classified  as  a  good.42  This  is  because  mass  dstribution  lessens  the  individual  or 
specialized nature of services. With mass distribution, a host is consistently supplying data 
as if it were a good. The consistent and dedicated nature of the distribution suggests there 
is an economic value to the data, which is transacted as if it were commerce in goods. 

Furthermore,  some Members  note  that  there  should  be  classification  as  a  good 
when  there  is  a  physical  counterpart  to  the  result  of electronic  transmission.43 This 
perspective attempts to dstinguish digtal transmissions of data and digital transmissions 
of products  which  exist in  tangible  form.  When  there  is  a tangible  counterpart,  the 
transmission should be classified as a good and thus tariff-liable.44 

There are WTO benefits to characterizing electronic transmissions as goods and thus 
subject to the GATT. At  an initial glance,  the  GATT appears less  favourable because  it 
permits  a  Member  to  impose  tariff-liability  on  most  goods.  Interestingly,  the  GATT 
places the general  obligations  of national  treatment  and  most-favoured-nation  (MFN) 
treatment, does not require specific commitments, and does not contain any progressive 
liberalization.  It thus  provides  a clearer sets of benefits  and  obligations for Members. 
Goods traded between Member countries benefit from national and MFN treatment. 

On  the  other  hand,  electronic  transmissions, like  most  forms  of  e-commerce, 
represent  a rapidly evolving technology. With fibre optics, satellite-based transmissions, 
mobile  communications  technology,  Internet  networks  and  the  constant  fusion 
between  these technologyes, electronic transmission will  evolve at an amazingly rapid 
pace. A classification of electronic transmissions as  a good would be short-sighted  as  it 
may become quickly outdated in a world of evolving technologies.  With this constant 
evolution, the GATS presents a better system of liberalization as its definition of services 
is  less  static  than  a  product/goods  determination  and  thus  more  accommodating  to 
technological  innovations. 
c.  LIKE ANY OTHER GOOD, ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSIONS SHOULD BE  SUBJECT TO 

CUSTOMS DUTIES 

For  proponents  of  applying  customs  duties  to  electronic  transmissions,  the 
argument rests on a classification of electronic transmissions as goods. Should this be the 
case,  customs  duties  could  be  applied.45  Goods  are  subject  to  Tariff  Schedules,  as 
submitted  to  the  WTO by  its  Members.  Goods  obtained  electronically,  such  as 
downloaded music or books, should be subject to customs duties just as tangible goods 

42  Ibid., at para. 2.7. 
43  Ibid., at para. 10. 
44  Ibid., at para. 2.3. 
45  While the WTO and the GATT have the objective of reducing trade barriers, tarif5 remain a fiaure in the 
trade regime of many nations. Many States are hesitant to completely liberalize their goods markets and eliminate 
all tarif5 for many goods. With this in mind, the GATT trade negotiation  rounds aimed to reduce ta&  rates for 
many goods. 

566 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

are. The GATT negotiations represent extensive multilateral obligations on tariff rates for 
various goods. Permitting  a class of goods, such as electronically transmitted  goods, to 
escape  customs  duties  disrupts  free  trade.46  The WTO represents  an  organized  and 
planned  effort  to  liberalize  trade  between  nations.  With  a  class  of  goods  escaping 
negotiated  tariff levels, Members  are having their benefits violated.  Tariff levels were 
negotiated;  each  tariff level  in  the  GATT represents  a  multilateral  benefit.  Members 
benefit  &om a certain  rate  negotiated  for goods such as  TVs, books  or video  cassette 
movies.  These  tariff  levels represent  a  multilateral  effort  to  achieve  free  trade.  For 
instance, Members negotiated a certain tariff level for books and CDs but these tariffs 
are not collected when there is an electronic transmission of these products because the 
transmission permits a customer to avoid customs declaration at a port. 

D.  BECAUSE THEY ARE A SERVICE, AND DETERMINATION  OF WHEN THERE IS  ACTUAL 
“IMPORTATION” REMAINS  UNCLEAR, ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSIONS SHOULD NOT 
BE  SUBJECT TO CUSTOMS DUTIES 

It is contended by some Members that electronic transmissions should not be subject 
to  customs  duties.47  Arguments  against  applying  customs  duties  rest  on  two  ideas: 
electronic transmissions  are  a  service, which  is  not  subject to  customs duties; and  it  is 
difficult to logistically apply customs duties to an electronically delivered product.48 The 
GATS does not include any mention or possibhty of applying customs duties,+’ and to apply 
tariffi to a service would  go against the benefits secured by  the  negotiated  Agreement. 
Accordingly, to apply tarif3 to trade in services is a violation of a Member’s GATS benefits. 
Electronic transfer presents many problems for applying customs duties, First, it is 
difficult  to  actually  determine  if  an  importation  takes  place.50  With  an  electronic 
transmission, there is no tangible object which crosses a physical border; with this lack, 
the  question  arises  of  when  and  if  an  importation  can  be  determined.  Without 
determination of when  an importation  occurs, it is difficult to establish when  customs 
duties should be applied.51 The Council for Trade in Goods reports: 

“. . . where customs duties were applied to goods in the delegation’s country, a cross-border 

46  A central tenet  of the WTO is that it represents a multilateral set of obligations which remove barriers  to 
trade. This is  accomplished by multilateral negotiations which set obligations and benefits. In these negotiations, 
Memben sort out and weigh each other’s economic comparative advantage in goods production to determine how 
goods can best be traded fieely. WTO Members benefit from this treaty-created system of free trade. If a Member 
does not fulfil its obligations, other Members have their benefits violated. This takes away an element of the free 
trade system which  was negotiated. In this light, the system of free trade is  disrupted when a Member violates it5 
WTO obligations. 

47  See Work  hograntme  11,  supra, footnote 21, at para. 22. 
48  Id. The Alliance for Global Business presents a series of reasons why e-commerce  should remain customs- 
duty-free: see Alliance for Global Business (AGB), Fact Sheet on the Duty-Free  Treatment ofElectronic Transmissions and 
Its  Importance  to  Global  Electronic  Commerce  and  Expanded  International  Trade,  October  1999,  available  at  the 
Organization  of  American  States  Foreign  Trade  Information  System:  xhttp//www.sice.oas.org/e-comm/ 
studies.aspr, viewed on 19 June 2001. 

49  Id. 
5”  See Work h o p m m e  I ,  supra,  footnote 2, at para. 2.9. 
5’  Ibid.,  at para. 4.3. 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER  THE W T O  

567 

trade transaction was always involved. With electronic commerce, especially in the Internet 
realm, it was unclear whether there was a ‘thing’ that actually moved across a border, which 
would lead to the  conclusion that  ‘importation’ in the sense of Article II  of the GATT had 
not taken place. GATT Article  II  referred to customs duties applied in connection with an 
importation. If no importation was involved, electronic transmission would be taken out of 
the realm of applying customs duties.”52 
Second,  the  electronic  nature  of  these  transfers  escapes  classification under  the 
Harmonized System (HS) which WTO Members use to classify products and determine 
tariff  levels.  The  HS  does  not  currently  include  any  electronic  transmissions.53 
Classification of a product in the HS relies on the “distinguishing physical characteristics 
of the product.”54 For instance, a CD or a book is  classified by the HS accorlng to its 
physical  shape,  size and dimensions.  Electronic transmissions represent  the  transfer of 
digital information, lacking a tangible quality. Electronic transmissions, however, do not 
have any physical characteristics.55 Digitalized information is only distinguishable by its 
content; it is  not recognizable,  until  a  recipient receives  it.  During transmission,  this 
information  remains  as  a  series  of  computer-generated  “0s”  and  “1s”.  Having  no 
physical characteristics, digital information and electronic transmissions escape the HS 
classification scheme. The Council for Trade in Goods expands: 

“While the HS distinguishes between empty carrier media and carrier media with content, 
it does not have a classification for the content itself. This can be illustrated by the case of 
computer software traded  over  the  Internet. The  HS  does  not  have  a  classification for 
software because software is  not a physical entity. Rather, software is  classified under the 
type of carrier media is contained 0n.”56 
Lacking  a  way  to  properly  place  electronic  transmissions  in  the  HS,  Members 

suggest that customs duties should not be applied to electronic transmissions. 

E.  CLASSIFICATION  AND  TAX-LIABILITY  EXAMPLES IN U.S.  LAW 

U.S.  law  has  begun  to  examine  many  of  the  issues  that  the  WTO faces  in 
determining  whether  electronic  transmissions  are  goods  or  services  and  whether 
e-commerce  should  be  taxed.  Should  the  WTO apply  the  U.S.  legal  perspective, 
electronic transmissions will not be classified as a good. They lack the “tangible” quality 
necessary  to  qualify  as  a  “good”.  Similarly, they  exchange  “computer information”, 
which  is  excluded  from  the  definition  of  “goods”.  Regarlng  the  taxing  of 

53  Ibid., at para. 2.9. 
53  Ibid.,  at  para. 4.4.  Alternatively, these classifications could be  added.  However, this goes contrary to the 

tendency of classifying electronic transmissions as a service. 

54  Ibid., at paras. 5.4 and 5.5. 
55  Alternatively, electronic transmissions could be classified according to whichever physical characteristics or 
carrier  the content  typically  has.  With this, electronic  transmissions would fit  into the HS  and the  GATT. This 
classification would  go  against  the  trend  to  keep  e-commerce  duty  free.  Also,  classification  of  an  electronic 
transmission into the HS would not reflect technological advances. For instance, with the music available online 
example,  HS  classification  would  place  this transmission in  the  CD or  magnetic  recording section  of the  HS. 
However, this does not reflect the actual transaction, because the physical elements of a magnetic recording or a 
CD are not evident when music is downloaded. 

56  See Work  J’rogramme  IV, supra, footnote 21, para. 2.2. 

568 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

e-commerce,  the  United States has been  hesitant  to  tax any  transaction  done by  this 
means.  The U S .  government  takes this  position  because  taxation  would  hinder  the 
medium’s development,  and  tax  liability would raise the  complex  issue  of which  tax 
regime should apply. 

1.  The U.S. Dejnition of  “Goods”: Stressing  the Tangible and  Movable Qualities 

Specifically, the most prevalent U.S. definition of goods is that used in the Uniform 
Commercial  Code  ( U C C ) . ~ ~  This  definition  stresses  the  “tangble”  and  “movable” 
qualities of goods.58 As  did the draft for the model law for computer information, the 
Uniform  Computer  Information  Transactions  Act  (1999)  (UCITA) incorporates  the 
UCC’S definition  of “goods”.~9 Most States have not adopted  or implemented  UCITA. 
It does, though, provide an example of how U.S. policy-makers  may define goods and 
services in the e-commerce  sector. 

To qualify as a “good” under the UCC there must be a tangible or physical quality 
present  at  the  time  of  the  transaction.60  According  to  these  criteria,  electronic 
transmissions  escape  the  definition  of being  goods.  There  is  no tangible  or movable 
is  transmitted.  Consequently,  the  U.S. 
object  evident  when  dqptal  information 
contract-law  perspective would fail to qualify electronic transmissions as a good. 

The UCC definition stresses the tangible and movable quahties of goods: 
“ ‘Goods’ means all things (including specially manufactured goods) which are movable at the 
time afident$cation  to  a contractfor  sale  other  than money in which the price is  to be  paid, 
investment  securities  (Article 8) and  things in  action.  ‘Goods’ also  includes the  unborn 
young of animals, growing crops, and other identified things attached to realty as described 
in the section on goods to be severed from realty.” (emphasis added).61 
The Official Comment adds: 
“The definition of goods is based on the concept of movability.”6’ 
Black’s Law Dictionary makes reference  to this definition of goods, and it adds: 
“The term does not include . . . general  intangible^."^^ 

~ 

Selected Commercial Statues, 48th edition, 2000; also “goods”, Black‘s Law Dictionary, supra, footnote 1, at 701. 

57  See Uniform Commercial Code [Code, 1999 Official], Article 2-105(1); Definitions: Goods, in West Group, 
58  See Ucc, id. 
59  See  S  102(33)  “Goods”,  National  Conference  on  Commissioners  on  Uniform  State  Laws,  Draft 
Amendments to Uniform  Computer Information Transactions Act, 28 July to 4 August 2000 (hereinafter UCITA) 
in  Doctrnieril  Supplenient  International  E-Commerce  Seminar,  Professor  Spanogle,  The George  Washington University 
Law School, Spring 2001, at pp. 281-309.  The most recent drafts of the UCITA can be viewed on the Web page of 
the  National  Conference  of  Commissioners  on  Uniform  State  Laws.  See  The  National  Conference  of 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, Drafts and Model Acts Official Site, available at: (<http://www.nccusI.orgr 
and (~http://www.law.upenn.edu/bll/ulc/ulc.htm~~, viewed on 19 June 2001. 

60  Ucc Article 2-105(1). 
61  Id. 

See West Group, supra, footnote 57, at 49. 

63  Supra, footnote 1, at 701, referring to U c c  § 2-101-(a)(24). 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER  THE WTO 

5 69 

When interpreting Article 2-105(1),  U.S. courts stress the tangible element of the 
transaction in question to determine if the software transaction implies a good or a lease. 
In Communications Groups Inc. v.  Warner Communications Inc., a New York County Court 
held  that  a software transaction  was  a  good because the  transfer from seller to buyer 
involved tangibles.64 Here, the contract stipulated “equipment” in the work schedule.65 
This inclusion  of tangbles-equipment-made 
the transaction a sale of goods.66 If the 
transaction was limited to information  only, without  tangibles such as  equipment, the 
contract would have been a service. 

In Archifectronics Inc.  v.  Control Systems  lnc.,  the Southern  District  Court of New 
York  held  that  a  software  transaction  was  not  a good.67  Here, the  Court noted  that 
software  is  considered  a  good,  but  that  copyrights,  patents  and  trademarks  are 
considered “intangibles” and thus not goods.68 In this case, the Court reasoned that the 
transaction  concerned the right to use software and the right to market the pr0duct.6~ 
The Court held  that  because  this  contract  implied  a transfer of intellectual  property 
rights, the transaction was a lease and thus not a sale of goods.70 

Accordingly,  following  US.  legal  analysis,  the  key  distinction  is  whether  the 
transmission involves the movement of tangibles or intangibles. The transfer of tangibles 
indicates  that  the  transmission involves  goods.  The transfer of intangibles  makes  the 
transmission a service. Specifically, if the electronic transmission is limited to transfer of 
digital information, U.S. law would find it a service. Examples of such transfer would 
be  an  MP3  music  file,  a  text  or a  magazine  article  downloaded  fiom  the  Internet. 
However,  if the  electronic  transmission includes  the transfer of anything  physical  or 
tangible,  then  the  transmission  will  imply  a  good.  Examples  of  this  would  include 
downloading a program or text electronically which includes paper literature, an article 
of clothing,  or  a  plastic  identification  card.  In  these  cases,  the  key  element  of  the 
transmission was digital information, but the inclusion of paper literature, an article of 
clothing  or  a  plastic  identification  card  reify  that  tangibles  are  included.  These  last 
examples are extreme, but they do illustrate that to securely avoid a transmission being 
identified as a goods transfer nothing tangible should be transferred. 

The UCITA bases  its  definition  of goods  on  the  UCC criteria  of tangibility  and 

movability, and tailors the UCC definition by adding: 

“ ‘Goods’ means all things that are movable at the time relevant to the computer information 
transaction  . . . The term  does not include computer information,  money, the subject of foreign 
exchange  transactions,  documents,  letters  of  credit,  letter-of-credit  rights,  instruments, 

64  See Communications Groups Inc.  v.  Warner Communications Inc., 527 N.Y.S. 2d, 341, 343 
65  Ibid., at 344. 
66  Id. 

See Architectronics h c .  v. Control Systems Inc., 935 F. Supp. 425, at 432. 

68  Id. 
69  Id. 
70  Id. 

570 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

investment  property,  accounts,  chattel  paper,  deposit  accounts,  or  general  intangibles.” 
(emphasis added).71 

It goes on to provide the following definition for computer information: 
“. . . information in electronic form which is obtained from or through the use of a computer 
or which is in a form capable of being processed by  a computer . . .’I72 
The  UCITA provides  a  series  of  exclusions  which  are  important  to  electronic 
transmissions. First, they stress that the UCITA applies to computer information and not 
to goods. It states: 

“This Act applies to computer information transactions . . . if a transaction includes computer 
information and goods, this Act applies to the transactions involving computer information, 
informational rights in it, and creation or modification of it.”73 
By  stressing  computer 

intangible 
(information)  versus  tangible  distinction  evident  in  U.S.  contract  law.  Accordingly, 
electronic transmissions under this definition are a service and not a good. 

the  UCITA highlights 

information, 

the 

Second, the  exclusions identify  many  transactions which  include  information  or 
intangibles and which are not within the UCITA’S scope. There is  a fear that industries 
which  use computer information may fall under new obligations and duties that are set 
in the UCITA. In particular, a business may use computer services to facilitate its industry, 
although  it  is  not  involved  in  computer  information  creation,  such  as  software 
production.  From this viewpoint, computers are used to create financial services, music 
recordings  and  motion  pictures.  These  industries  fear  that  the  UCITA will  place 
contractual  obligations  on them.  Accordingly,  the  UCITA includes  specific exclusions 
which nulli6 its application to these industries.74 Using this example, international legal 
obligations  evident  in  the  WTO, EU,  or  other  treaties  could proceed  to  specifically 
exclude computer-facilitated  transactions from e-commerce. 

Electronic transmissions fail to meet the tangibility criterion as defined in the UCC 
and the UCITA. First, there is no tangible or physical product evident when an electronic 
transmission takes place; the recipient  uses a computer program  presented  by the host 
only  to  attain  additional  hgital  information.  This  digital information  can  be used  to 
reproduce music as on a CD, text as in a book or computer functions as in a computer 
program. Nonetheless, there is never any movable or physical object present at the time 
of the  transaction,  only  a transfer of digital information.  The UCITA also  sets out the 
standard, “all things that are movable at the time relevant  to the computer information 
transaction.”75 With no physical product  existent at the time of transmission, electronic 
transmissions thus fail to meet the “goods” definition. 

7’  Supra, footnote 59, at §  102(33). 
72  Ibid., at §  102(10). 
73  Ibid., at §  103(b)(l). 
74  Ibid., at §  103(b)(2). 
75  Ibid., at §  102(33). 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER THE WTO 

57 1 

Second, electronic transmissions also fail to meet other “goods” criteria, defined in 
the UCC and UCITA; they fdl within  the  “general intangibles” exclusion of the UCC 
and  the  “computer  information”  exclusion  in  the  uCITA.76 These  two  Sections 
specifically  exclude  “general  intangibles”  and  “computer  information”  from  the 
“goods”  definition.77  Electronic  transmissions  are  the  exchange  of  computer 
information. This information may produce  music texts, or a computer program, but 
it is not a good. 

The significance of the information exchanged in an electronic transmission is that 
a computer uses it. The information is of no value without using a computer to read it. 
A  CD or MP3 player reads the information transmitted with a computer  to  produce 
music. A computer’s central processing unit (CPU) reads &gital information and &splays 
it  on  a  computer  monitor  as  text.  A  computer’s  attached  printer  reads  the  digital 
information and produces a paper copy of the text, while a CPU reads lgital information 
to run a computer program. In all three examples, a computer is necessary to read the 
d@al  information. This data is computer information. Accordmgly, it is excluded from 
the UCC and UCITA definitions of “goods”. 

2.  U.S. Preservation of  Tax and Customs-Duty Neutrafityfor  E-Commerce 

The U.S.  domestic treatment  of e-commerce  provides for  non-taxation  and  no 
tariff  liability  for  international  electronic  transmissions.  There  is  a  temporary 
moratorium on taxing e-commerce transactions, and there is a clear legal precedent that 
electronic transmissions are not subject to customs duties. Indeed, the United States has 
decided  to  not  impose  any  customs duties or  taxes  on  e-commerce  transactions.  In 
1997, the Clinton Administration presented A Framework for  Global Electronic Commerce, 
which  stressed  the  importance  of  tax  neutrality  for  e-commerce.78  The  Report 
explained that subjecting e-commerce  to tax liability would impede the growth of the 
medium.79  “Inconsistent tax regimes” would create confusion for both consumers and 
businesses.80 This rationale led to the Internet Tax Freedom Act (ITFA)  which placed a 
three-year moratorium on imposing any new taxes on “Internet access and multiple or 
discriminatory taxes on electronic commerce”.81 The Act is: 

“. . . based on a simple principle: Information should not be taxed. As we enter the digital age, 

76 Id. 
77 See supra, footnotes 61 and 64 and accompanying text. 
78  See White House, A Frameworkfor  Global Electronic Commerce, available at: c(http://www.ecommerce.gov/ 
fiamewrk.htm)) (hereinafter  Framework),  viewed on 20  April  2001; Jeffery P.  Cunard  and Jennifer B. Coplan, 
Selected  Topics in E-commerce LAUJ, 86 PLI/NY 333, at 428. 

7y  Specifically, the Report states: “In addition, the United States believes that no new taxes should be imposed 

on Internet commerce.”: see Framework, ibid., at Issues §  1, “Customs and Taxation”. 

80  See id.; also Cunard and Coplan, supra, footnote 78, at 428. 
81  See Cunard and Coplan, id.; see also Internet Tax Freedom Act, P.L. 105-277,  at Office of Representative 
Christopher Cox, Internet Tax Freedom Act Home Page, available at: cchttp://cox.house.gov/nettax/,,, viewed on 
20 April 2001. 

572 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

the age of information, establishing this principle in law will have profound and long-lasting 
consequences.”82 
Sidarly, the  US.  Customs  Service  does  not  subject  electronic  transmissions to 
customs duties.83 In presenting its “Importation Requirements”, the Customs Service states: 
“Information and  materials  downloaded from  the  Internet are  not  subject  to  duty.  This 
applies to any  goods or merchandise  that  are  electronically  transmitted  to  the purchaser, 
such as CDs, books or posters.”84 
When asked about what customs  duties are applicable  to software transmitted by 
electronic  means,  the Customs Service  explains that  “software  entered via  electronic 
transmissions”  is  exempted from the  “general  rule that  all  goods  provided for in the 
HTSUS [Harmonized  Tariff  Schedule  of  the  United  States]  are  subject  to  duty. 
Therefore, no duty is owed if software is entered via electronic transrnissions.”85 

111.  T O  SECURE TRADE LIBERALIZATION, 

INHERENT COMPLEXITIES AND 

AMBIGUITIES IN THE GATS URGE A CLEAR DETERMINATION 
TRANSMISSION 

DEBATE 

O F  THE ELECTRONIC 

In order to understand  how WTO obligations affect electronic transmissions, this 

Page, id. 

**  “Plain English” Summary $The  Internet  Tax Freedom Act (P.L. 105-277)  at Internet Tax Freedom Act Home 
*3  In  the past, the  U.S.  Customs  Service has  provided  confusing decisions regarding what  is  merchandise 
(customs-duty liable) and whether software is customs-duty liable: see Jenna F. Karadbil and Kerith A.  Strano, Panel 
VII: Taxes, Tan&,  and  Other Regulafory Barriers to Electronic Commerce, 17 Ariz. J. Int’l & Comp. L.  183, at  189-191. 
The U.S. Customs Service had not taken a definitive stance that software does not qualify as  “merchandisc” and 
thus is not subject to customs duties. In U.S. customs law, importers must file customs entry forms to pay  duties 
for all “merchandise”. See also Karadbil and Strano (refemng to 19 USC 5 1484 (2001)). The term “merchandise” 
is defined as “goods, wares, and chattels of every description, and includes merchandise the importation of which 
is prohibited, and certain monetary instruments.”: see Karadbil and Strano (referring to 19 USC §  1401(c)). In the 
past, it remained unclear if this definition included digitalized information.  O n  two separate occasions, the U.S. 
Customs  Service  took  confusing  stands.  First,  it  held  that  software  purchased  overseas  on  the  Internet  was 
merchandise and was an  “object of trade”. This occurred in Headquarters Ruling Letter 114459, of 17 September 
1998: see Karadbil and Strano. Second, it held, in General Note 16 to the 1999 Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the 
United  States,  that  “telecommunications  transmissions”  are  not  “goods  subject  to  the  Tariff  Schedule.”:  see 
Karadbil and Strano. This illustrates that, when first confronted with the complexities of electronic transmissions, 
the U.S. Customs Service took some time to clearly define if they were or were not subject to customs duties. 

84  U.S. Customs Service, Internet  Transactions, available at: cchttp://www.customs.gov/impoex/inetrade.htm>), 

viewed on 20 April 2001, at 7. Interestingly, in this description, the Customs Service notes it is illegal to download 
copyrighted materials without authorization and to download child pornography. The Customs Service does apply 
customs duties to products which are purchased over the Internet yet imported by  non-electronic  means. 

85 See U.S.  Customs Service, Dept. of Treasury, Re: Computer S$tware  on Diskette atid o n  CD-ROM; Sojware 
via Electronic Transmission, 1997, WL 336120,  17 April  1997, a letter from the Customs Service respondmg to an 
inquiry from a British sofmare exporter about the customs duties for software imported on diskette, CD-ROM, 
and via  electronic means. In this letter, the Customs Service places software imported on diskette in the HTSUS 
classification sub-chapter 85.24.99.40, which is for “Records, tapes, and other recorded media for sound or other 
similarly recorded  phenomena  . . . other.”  It places the software on CD-ROM in subheading 85.24.39.00 of the 
HTSUS, which is for “Records, tapes, and other recorded media for sound or other similarly recorded phenomena 
. . . discs for laser reading systems.” Accordingly, in  deciding how to apply  customs duties, the  Customs Service 
determines where the  articles  fit within  the  U.S. Tariff Schedule. This determination  depends on  the physical 
attributes of the  article. Here,  software had  three  different  treatments:  (1) no  classification  in  the  Schedule if 
transmitted via  electronic  means;  (2)  classification  as  a diskette; and  (3) classification as  a  CD-ROM. The only 
differences in these three classifications rest on the physical attributes. Accordingly, electronic transmissions escape 
the tariff classification scheme of the Tariff Schedules. 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER  THE WTO 

573 

article  provides  two  hypothetical  examples.  One is  in  a  country with free  trade  and 
national treatment in the electronic transmission services sector, while the other is in a 
country without bee trade in the electronic transmissions services sector. 

Example  1: 

Ernesto, residmg in country Free Trade Land (FTL), downloads an MP3 file from 
Internet Music Service Page Inc.  (IMs) which  is based in Foreign  Country (FC). 
Ernesto  pays  for  the  service  and  receives  the  MP3 file.  FC  and  FTL are  both 
Members  of  the  WTO. With  bilateral  negotiations  and  determination  in  their 
commitment  Schedules, FC and FTL have agreed to extend national treatment  to 
trade in electronic transmission services. 

There are no customs duties included in Emesto’s price because the IMS is classified 
as “trade in electronic transmission service”. As a service, this transaction falls under 
GATS, which prohibits tariffs for service transactions. Purchasing the same music in 
CD form or as an over-the-counter  MP3 file would include customs duties if the 
CD or MP3 file was imported.  Accordingly, classification as a service permits this 
download  to  benefit  from  customs-duty-free  treatment.  Also, IMS benefits  fi-om 
national treatment  in FTL. Although  it is a foreign  company,  IMS enjoys all rights 
that  a  service  provider  from  FTL would,  because  of  the  specific service  sector 
commitments  between  FTL  and  FC.  Therefore,  specific  service  sector 
commitments  provide  electronic  transmission  service  providers  easier  access  to 
conduct business in WTO countries. 

Example 2: 

John, a resident of country Secure Our Borders (SOB), downloads an MP3 file from 
Internet Music  Service Page  Inc.  (IMs)  which  is based in Foreign  Country (FC). 
John pays for and receives the MP3 file. John pays customs duties on the download 
to avoid a penalty from SOB’S Internet Download Monitor Board  (IDMB). FC and 
SOB have no trade agreement on electronic transmissions; SOB is not a Member of 
the WTO. SOB classifies electronic transmissions as goods when there is a transfer of 
something similar to a physical product. 

John  pays a higher  price  than  Ernesto because the MP3 file download  in SOB is 
classified as a good. The MP3 has a physical counterpart, i.e. a CD. As a good, CDs 
are tariff-liable. With customs duties added to the MP3’s price, this increases John’s 
and IMS’ costs. Because SOB must determine  when there is an actual importation, 
SOB sets up the IDMB. SOB has to pay to create and maintain this new admmistrative 
agency.  SOB charges  a  value-added  tax  to  John  to  pay  for  the  creation  and 
maintenance  of  the  IDMB. Also,  IMS is  subject  to  foreigner-specific  regulations 

574 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

concerning  setting  up  a  foreign  office,  electricity,  importing  hardware,  and 
Internet-provider 
treatment  and 
liberalization in the  trade  in  electronic transmission services, John’s  transaction is 
more expensive than Ernesto’s. Yet both received the same result-a  music file. 

licences.  Accordmgly,  without 

tariff-fiee 

With four modes  of supply of services, required  Member-specific  commitments 
and  continuing  trade  negotiations  on market  access to  services, the  GATS presents  a 
complex and unclear set ofWT0 obligations for trade in services. Any obligations which 
result  from  a  resolution  of  the  electronic  transmission  debate  wlll  be  a  part  of this 
complex  network  of GATS commitments.  Accordmgly,  this  article  contends  that  the 
WTO should begin to resolve the electronic transmission debate in order to then decide 
appropriately  how  liberalization  commitments  for  trade  in  electronic  transmission 
services fill within the GATS framework. Without these definitions and determinations, 
the  WTO will  continue  in  a  state of uncertainty  and  inability  to secure  e-commerce 
GATS benefits for its Members. By clearly defining whether electronic transmissions are 
a service or a good, customs-duty  free or tariff-liable,  the WTO may procced to define 
what trade liberalization obligations exist. With this objective, this section describes the 
GATS’ unique legal commitment framework. 

A.  “MODES OF SUPPLY”  AND A  LACK  OF DEFINITIONS 

Article I  defines the scope and coverage of the GATS.  The Article states that GATS 
applies to “measures by  [WTO]  Members affecting trade in services.”*6 This includes all 
services, except those “supplied in the exercise of governmental authority”.87 The GATS 
does not, however, provide a clear and precise definition of “what is a service [or] what 
is  not  a  service.”** Observers  have  explained  that  Members  were  hesitant  to  define 
“services” because “they concluded no practical purpose can be served by an attempt to 
define  service^'."*^ Aly K. Abu-Akeel  provides this explanation: 

“Given  the  enormity  of  tradable  services and  the  continuous  change  in  the  description, 
content, and characteristics of any given service due to constant technological advances, it 
is sufficient for purposes of the GATS to define only what is meant by ‘trade in  service^'."^^ 
The  dynamic  and  changing  nature  of  electronic  transmissions  illustrate  why 

negotiators were so hesitant to agree to a definition of services. 

8h  See WTO, General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), Article I;  Scope and Definition, available at: 
((http://www.wto.org/english/tratop-e/serv-e/l-scdef~e.htm)),  viewed  on  20 April  2001.  Emad  Tinawi  and 
Judson 0. Berkey argue that electronic  services do not fit in well within the  GATS four part  “trade in services” 
definition:  see  Emad  Tinawi  and  Judson  0. Berkey,  E-Services  and  the  WTo--The  Adequacy  of  the  GATS 
Classijcation  Franiework,  available  at  the  Organization  of  American  States  Foreign  Trade  Information System: 
(<http://www.sice.oas.org/e-comm/studies.aspn, viewed on 19 June 200 1. 

J. Int’l L. & Econ., at  189. 

87  Ibid., Article 1(3)(b). 
**  Id.; see also Aly K. Abu-Akeel, Definition of  Trade in Setvices under the GATS: Legal Implications, 32 Geo. Wash. 
89  Ibid., at  190. 
90 Ibid., at  190-191. 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER THE WTO 

575 

In  setting  out  four  modes  of  supply,  Article  I  defines  “trade  in  services”. 

Specifically, Article 112) states: 

“For the purposes of this Agreement, trade in services is defined as the supply of a service: 
(a)  &om the temtory of one Member into the territory of any other Member; 
(b)  in the territory of one Member to the service consumer of any other Member; 
(c)  by  a service supplier of one Member, through commercial presence in the territory of 

any other Member; 

(d)  by a service supplier of one Member, through presence of natural persons of a Member 

in the temtory of any other Member.” 

Put generally, these modes of supply refer to “cross-border supply”, “consumption 
abroad”,  “commercial  presence”,  and  “presence  of  natural  persons”.  Article  1(2) 
describes  where  the  “trade”  occurs  and  assumes  “services”  will  be  understood  by 
observers and Members.  With this  definitional  framework,  the  GATS identifies what 
trade in services accomplishes: it supplies across borders, provides a commercial presence 
abroad, and  establishes a physical  presence  abroad. The GATS does not define what  a 
service is. It does point to four areas where trade in services occurs. 

This lack of definition fuels the current electronic transmission debate. Electronic 
transmissions represent  a “cross-border  supply” and “consumption  abroad”.  With this 
in  mind,  they  can  be  classified  as  “trade  in  services”.  Similarly,  some  electronic 
transmissions result in a product  which  is  no dfferent to a  good.  Music downloaded 
from the Internet is not different to a physically transported CD. A manuscript attached 
to  an  e-mail  and  sent  across borders  is  no  different  to  a book  which  faces  customs 
inspection  and  tariff charges. With a more  precise  definition  of “services”, Members 
could decipher whether  electronic transmissions are a good  or a  service. Currently, a 
lack  of  a  clear  definition  fuels  the  debate  and  permits  Members  to  avoid  any 
commitments and to delay liberalization negotiations. 

Despite  this  definitional  dilemma,  the  GATS sets  a  series  of obligations  which 
Members  must  provide  to  “trade  in services” from other  Members.  Article  11’s MFN 
treatment  obligation  is  the most important.  Also it is important to note that the GATS 
does  not  include  a  national  treatment  ~bligation.~’ National  treatment  is  a  general 
obligation  evident  in  the  GATT and  many  other  WTO Agreements92 and  is  used  in 
international  treaties to provide foreigners the same benefits afforded to nationals of a 
State. It is of extreme importance because it provides foreigners the certainty that they 
will not be discriminated  against. It is a principal benefit  of the WTO and  GATT legal 
framework, as is MFN treatment. 

MFN is usually sought by States in order to ensure that any benefits received &om 
a treaty  are not overshadowed  or made insignificant by  future  agreements  with  other 

9’  See GATS, supra, footnote 86, at Part 11:  General Obligations and Discipline. 
92  See, WTO,  General  Agreement  on  Tariffs and Trade  1947, Article  III:  National  Treatment  on  Internal 
Taxation and  Regulation, available at: cchttp://www.sice.oas.org/TRADEE.ASP#WTO/GATT)>, viewed on 20 
April 2001; Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, Article 111:  National Treatment, 
available at: c(http://www.wto.org/english/tratop-e/~ps-e/t-a~2-e.htm)),  viewed on 20 April 2001. 

576 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

States. For example, State A and State B may agree to certain benefits in Treaty X with 
an MFN clause. If State A  comes to another  agreement  with  State C in Treaty Z ,  by 
virtue  of the  first  Treaty’s MFN clause  State B  will  receive  the benefits  of Treaty  Z. 
Without the MFN clause, State B would not receive the new benefit. Consequently, the 
benefits agreed to in first agreement  would be less favourable when  compared to the 
second agreement. 

B.  THE  COMPLEXITY  OF SPECIFIC COMMITMENTS 

By setting the obligation of national treatment in Part 111  (Specific Commitments), 
the  GATS makes one of the WTO general obligations into an obligation  required only 
by  specific  commitment.  Essentially,  Members  only  have  to  provide  “national 
treatment” in trade in those service sectors where they make a specific commitment and 
place this commitment in their Schedule.93 If they do not make a specific commitment 
or  if  they  fail to  include  it  in  their  Schedule,  Members  can  provide  discriminatory 
treatment to foreign service providers. With the GATS scheme, a Member may provide 
discriminatory treatment  to an electronic transmission provider from another Member 
country. 

Specifically, Article  XVI (Market Access) states that  for  a  service supplier from  a 

Member country to another Member’s market: 

“. . . each Member shall accord services and service suppliers of any other Member treatment 
no less favourable than that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed 
and specified in its Schedule.” (footnote 0mitted).~4 
And for national treatment, Article XVII (National Treatment) states that Members 
shall provide  “treatment  no less favourable than  that it accords to its own like services 
and  service  suppliers.”  The Article,  though,  permits  Members  to  provide  “different 
treatment” for foreign service suppliers.95 Article X V I I ( ~ )  adds: 

“A Member may meet the requirement of paragraph 1 by  according to services and service 
suppliers  of  any  other  Member,  either formally  identical treatment  or formally  di&erent 
treatment to that it accords to its own like services and service suppliers.” (emphasis added). 
By eliminating any distinction  between  “formally identical  treatment  or formally 
different  treatment”,  Article  X V I I ( ~ )  provides  Members  with  a  legal  avenue  for 
discriminating against foreigners. 

For goods, the GATT provides national treatment as a general obligation. It sets this 

standard: 

“The products of the territory of any contracting party imported into the territory of any 

93  Article XVI. 
94  Article x v i ( 1 ) .  
95  See  Raj Bhala and Kevin  Kennedy,  World  Trade  Law: The GAT-WTO System,  Regiotial  Arrangements and 

U S .  Law, Lexus Law Publishers, Charlottesville, VA, 1998, at  1259-1260. 

E-COMM  TRADE UNDER  THE WTO 

577 

other contracting party shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to 
like products of national origin in respect of all laws, regulations and requirements affecting 
their internal sale, offering for sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or use  . . .”96 
Without any limitations set by specific commitments or by the ‘‘formally identical 
treatment or formally different treatment”, the GATT provides treatment which may be 
more  favourable  to  goods.  For  trade  in  services,  legal  counsel  must  analyse  if  the 
treatment is provided in a Member’s specific Schedule, while for goods, legal counsel 
rests  more  secure  that  Article  111  of  the  GATT sets  national  treatments  as  a  general 
obligation and is not subject to any specific commitments. 

WTO Members have the choice to decide whether electronic transmissions will be 
subject to  the  GATS or the  GATT. At  first glance, the  GATS appears more  favourable, 
because  it  provides for no  tariff liability for trade in services. The GATT appears less 
favourable, because it subjects goods to customs duties. The GATS, however, does limit 
the  application  of fundamental WTO rights such  as  MFN and  national treatment.  In 
decidmg whether electronic transmissions should be classified as  a  good  or a  service, 
Members must weigh tariff-‘-free treatment with  limited MFN and national treatment. 
Put  bluntly:  what  is  preferable, clearly  set  tariffs  or  the  possibility of  discriminatory 
treatment? 

This limited version of national treatment, as opposed to the general obligation for 
goods, is  a  result  of services being tariff-free  while  goods are  tariff-liable.  Generally 
spealung, international trade in goods is restricted by customs duties, while services are 
not subject to customs duties. Without customs duties, the movement of services would 
be too fi-ee and many Members hesitant to open their markets as much. Accordmgly, 
Members have  to place a service on its  Schedule in order to be obligated to provide 
non-discriminatory treatment. 

The WTO explains this difference: 
“At  first  sight, it  may  be  difficult  to  understand  why  the  right  to  national treatment  is 
restricted  under  the  GATS to  services for  which  commitments  have  been  undertaken, 
whereas under  the GATT it applies to all  goods. The reason lies in the nature of trade in 
services. Universal  national treatment  for  goods is  possible, without  creating free  trade, 
because the entry of foreign goods into a national market can still be controlled by import 
duties, quantitative restrictions and other border measures. By contrast, a foreign supplier of 
most services, particularly if those services are supplied by commercial or personal presence 
in the importing country’s market, will in practice enjoy virtually free access to that market 
if given national treatment, since this by definition will remove any regulatory advantage 
enjoyed by the domestic service ~upplier.”~’ 
There is a need to control this trade because, without limitations, domestic markets 

would be disrupted with a flood of imported services. 

96  Article III(4). 
97  See WTO Secretariat, supra, footnote 29, at para. 8 

578 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

With the limits set on national treatment by the GATS, services have a more limited 
market  access  than  goods.  The  GATT provides  a  general  obligation  for  national 
treatment;  the  GATS, though,  requires  a  specific  commitment  from  a  Member  for 
national  treatment  to  be  an  obligation.  Specific  commitments  provide  individual 
Members  additional  discretion  to  choose  whether  or  not  to  extend  the  treatment. 
Furthermore,  the  need  for  specific commitments  provides  Members  with  additional 
leverage and  opportunities  for  delay when  negotiating  any WTO obligation.  Because 
national  treatment  is  not  secured  for  all  services,  Members  will  play  upon  their 
individual extension  of national treatment  to secure a better negotiating position in the 
WTO. This position  will extend  to other WTO negotiations  in other sectors and, as a 
result, services such as e-commerce  have a more fragile national treatment benefit. 
c.  PROGRESSIVE  LIBERALIZATION  AND SPECIFIC COMMITMENTS:  AMBIGUOUS 

BENEFITS 

Currently, the GATS does not provide a clearly defined set of benefits to liberalized 
cross-border  trade  in services. The trade-in-services  sector  of electronic transmissions 
does  not  benefit  from  specific  commitments.  For  a  Member  to  benefit  from  GATS 
liberalization, there must be a specific commitment  made by another Member to open 
a service sector. Members must take part in continued negotiations-called  progressive 
liberalization-to 
liberalize  specific sectors of the  service  economy.  A  Member  may 
only benefit from market access to another Member’s service economy when there is a 
specific commitment made in a particular service sector. Absent this commitment, there 
is  no  guaranteed  market  access  or benefit  of national  treatment.  Accordingly,  GATS 
benefits  of  tariff-free  trade  in  services,  MFN treatment  and  national  treatment  are 
conditional on further negotiations and on reaching a specific commitment in particular 
sectors. Consequently,  trade  in  e-commerce  services will  only be  guaranteed  market 
access when negotiations  and additional commitments are reached. 

GATS Article xrx(1) sets the progressive liberalization standard as: 
“. . . Members shall enter into successive rounds of negotiations, beginning not later than five 
years from the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement and periodically thereafter, 
with a view to achieving a progressively higher level of liberalization  . . .” 
Members will have to engage in multilateral, bilateral, or plurilateral negotiations 

to establish which service sectors will be liberalized.g* 

This liberalization is not guaranteed  to be multilateral. Members will benefit from 
market access to service sectors only as another Member makes a specific commitment 
to  liberalize a  service  sector.  The negotiations  explained  in  Article  XIX  serve  as  the 

98  The WTO Secretariat  explains thc  importance of new  negotiations: “Article  XIX  is  a  guarantee  that  the 
present  Gxrs  package  is  only  the  first  fruit  of  a  continuing  enterprise, to  be  undertaken  jointly  by  all  WTO 
Members, to raise the level  of services commitments  towards  one another.”:  see  WTO Secretariat,  Guide to  the 
Uruguay Round  Agreements, at  173. 

E-COMM  TRADE  UNDER  THE WTO 

579 

forum  to reach  a consensus about which  Member  will  liberalize which  sectors. This 
contrasts with the GATT’s general approach which provides benefits to all Members. The 
GATS, however,  only  extends  benefits  such  as  MFN or  national  treatment  when  an 
individual Member ~ o m m i t s . ~ ~ T h i s  
conditioning of GATS benefits is set in Article xvI(1) 
(Market Access). It states: 

“With respect  to  market  access through  the modes  of supply identified in  Article  I,  each 
Member shall accord services and service suppliers of any other Member treatment no less 
favourable than  that provided for under the terms, limitations and conditions agreed  and 
specified in its Schedule.” (footnote omitted). 

By permitting Members to limit market access on an individual basis, Article XVI 
shifts the importance from the GATS Agreement to the commitment Schedules of its one 
hundred and forty-one  Members. 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

Currently,  the  WTO faces  a  variety  of  complex  issues  surrounding  electronic 

transmissions. Specifically, these include: 

-  classification  of  electronic  transmissions  (or  the  “electronic  transmission 

- 

- 

debate”); 
extension  of the moratorium on applying customs duties; and 

commencing  liberalization  negotiations  for  the  e-commerce  trade  services 
sector. 

Before Members benefit from any liberalization in this sector, these issues must be 
resolved. The moratorium is a temporary solution to the problem of applying customs 
duties to electronic transmissions. 

Because no Member has demonstrated or expressed an interest in applying customs 
duties, an agreed-to  moratorium does not necessarily translate into a real benefit.  The 
multilateral efforts spent to reach a moratorium may be better spent on proceeding with 
liberalization  in  the  sector.  The  GATS provides  Members  with  the  power  to  limit 
national  treatment  and  MFN treatment  to  protect  their  service  sector  markets.  Any 
liberalization requires an affirmative and specific commitment. Accordmgly, a Member 
may proceed with trade in the e-commerce  service sector negotiations without fearing 
that their markets will be penetrated by foreign providers. 

99 This conditioning  is further  complicated by  the schematic structure  of a Member’s Schedule. Bhala and 
Kennedy note: “If the framework of agreement is the skeleton of the GATS, then  the Schedule of market access 
commitments is the flesh and bones. The Members’ Schedules list the service sectors and modes ofsupply for which 
individual Members have agreed to provide full or partial access to the service suppliers of other WTO Members.”: 
see Bhala and Kennedy, s u p ,  footnote 95, at 1256. They add “Only those industries that are listed in a Member’s 
Schedule of Commitments are open to foreign service suppliers with respect to at least one mode ofsupply.”: ibid., 
at  1257. 

580 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

The WTO should  define  electronic  transmission  as  a service  and, as  such,  free 
from customs duties. This will provide three important benefits. First, Members will 
be able to begin thinking about how to liberalize or protect their domestic electronic 
transmission service market in the future. Members will be able to prepare themselves 
for  the progressive  liberalization  required  under  the  GATS. In particular,  Members 
will not have  to decide  if this  economic sector  requires  treatment  as  a  good  or as  a 
service. 

Second, Members will not have to face the daunting task of classifying electronic 
transmissions  within  their  Tariff  Schedules.  As  the  U.S.  Customs  Service’s position 
illustrates, it is not easy  to place electronic transmissions within  such a Schedule. The 
HS distinguishes products by their physical attributes.  Because electronic transmissions 
only contain digital information, it is difficult to place them in the HS Schedule. 

Third,  Members  will  benefit  from  the  GATS’  open  definition  of  “services”. 
Electronic transmissions represent a highly technical and constantly changing medium. 
Economic necessity and technologcal innovation develop faster than multilateral legal 
obligations. If the WTO labelled electronic transmissions as a good, then this definition 
might not accurately represent future technological  developments. With this in mind, 
GATS negotiators  were  hesitant  to  draft  a  “service”  definition  which  might,  in  the 
future, have excluded important functions. With the  GATS, Members have the benefit 
of  limiting  liberalization  with  specific  commitments.  This  power  of  specific 
commitments provides Members with a way to guide or control liberalization of their 
electronic transmissions market sector. 

The benefits of liberalization, however, will only develop when Members proceed 
to  the  progressive  liberalization  step  of  the  GATS framework.  This  requires  the 
identification  of a service area sector which Members intend to liberalize. Accordingly, 
the WTO should definitively classi@ electronic transmissions as a service and not subject 
to customs duties. 

With these steps, Members will be able to begin examining how and under what 

conditions may they liberalize their electronic transmissions market. 


