The  (2007) Vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 419–437

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2007.00329.x

Patenting Human DNA: What Flexibilities
Does the TRIPS Agreement Allow?

Carlos M. Correa
University of Buenos Aires

The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agree-
ment) requires World Trade Organization (WTO) members to grant patents in all ﬁelds of
technology. A large number of patents covering genes, including of human origin, have been
issued in developed countries. In some cases, patents granted cover any possible use of the
gene, even if not disclosed in the application. However, WTO members enjoy a signiﬁcant
ﬂexibility to determine their policy regarding gene patents. The TRIPS Agreement does not
deﬁne what an ‘‘invention’’ is; it does not determine either how the novelty and other
patentability requirements are to be applied. Hence, national laws may exclude genes, even if
claimed as isolated, altogether from patent protection. If gene patents were issued, they may
nonetheless apply limitations to the scope of claims, such as circumscribing protection to the
uses speciﬁcally claimed by the applicant. An exception based on moral considerations is also
viable, particularly in the case of human genes. In view of this ﬂexibility, countries may adopt
the policies on this subject that best suit their cultural and moral values and their
technological or industrial policies.

Keywords patents; human DNA; invention; TRIPS Agreement ﬂexibilities

The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
Agreement) deﬁned, for the ﬁrst time in a multilateral treaty, certain requirements
regarding the subject matter eligible for patent protection.1 Article 27.1 stipulated
that ‘‘patents shall be available for any inventions, whether products or processes, in
all ﬁelds of technology, provided that they are new, involve an inventive step and are
capable of industrial application’’. While this provision was an outstanding victory
for the established pharmaceutical industry (see, e.g., Perez Pugatch, 2004), as long as
it ensured an almost worldwide protection for pharmaceutical products2 by January
2005,3 the rules of relevance to the emerging biotechnology industry were more
limited and provided a less clear legal framework. This was a reﬂection, to a great
extent, of the divergences existing among developed countries about the protection of
biotechnological inventions (see, e.g., United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development—International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development [UN-
CTAD-ICTSD], 2005, p. 388). These divergences have persisted. In a report issued in
2002, the World Health Organization (WHO) noted that ‘‘[C]urrently, the situation
regarding the patenting of discoveries arising from genomics is little less than chaotic
and has come under ﬁerce criticism from many quarters’’ (WHO, 2002, p. 135).

Article 27.1 of the TRIPS Agreement obligates members to protect ‘‘inven-
tions’’ provided that they meet the requirements of novelty, inventive step (or

r  r 419

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

non-obviousness) and industrial applicability (or utility). As examined below, in
many jurisdictions genes, including human genes, can be patented. The key issue for
the purposes of this article is whether the TRIPS Agreement can be interpreted as
obligating member countries to grant patents over genes, particularly human genes,
or whether members have the freedom to do so or not. A further question is
whether, in cases where a member grants such patents, what type of limitations with
regard to the scope of protection could be applied.

This paper examines the concept of ‘‘invention’’, particularly as applied to
genes and ‘‘micro-organisms’’ in the context of the TRIPS Agreement. It also
explores the ﬂexibilities allowed by the Agreement in relation to the application of
the novelty requirement and the exception grounded on morality grounds, and the
implications of the possible extension of a patented process to the product directly
obtained with it. Finally, the article discusses possible ways of limiting the scope of
gene patents.

TRIPS Requirements

What is an ‘‘Invention’’?
Article 27.1 of the TRIPS Agreement prescribes, as mentioned, that patents shall be
available for any inventions ‘‘provided that they are new, involve an inventive step
and are capable of industrial application’’.

One possible interpretation of article 27.1 is that, in line with the current
practice of many patent ofﬁces in the world, DNA sequences claimed in patents
should be deemed as ‘‘inventions’’, and not as natural phenomena, to the extent that
claims do not relate to genes as they occur naturally, but rather to isolated or
puriﬁed genes.

In fact, in some countries any subject matter that is novel and meets the
inventive-step and industrial applicability (utility) standards may be patentable.
Under this approach,
it is not relevant whether the subject matter has been
merely discovered or created. Thus,
in Japan the Enforcement Standards for
Substance Patents stipulates that patents can be granted on chemical substances
artiﬁcially isolated from natural materials, when the presence of the substance could
not be detected without prior isolation with the aid of physical or chemical
methods.

Although in the United States it is recognized that to be patentable, a substance
cannot be claimed as it exists in nature,4 an isolated or puriﬁed form thereof is
patentable (Chisum and Jacobs, 1992, pp. 2–23). Hence, only a very thin line
separates invention from discovery, and many patents have been granted on
puriﬁed or crystallized products obtained from a natural source of impure material.
They have included, for instance, puriﬁed dextrose, pure carbon in the form of
porous pellets, synthetically produced vitamin B12, prostangladin compounds,
interferon and strawberry ﬂavoring compositions. The US Court of Appeals for
the Federal Circuit has afﬁrmed the validity of claims to full-length DNA or

420

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

genomic DNA molecules in the pharmaceutical ﬁeld. Patents may relate to genomic
DNA, a natural substance, or cDNA, that is, a DNA copy of mRNA that does not
exist as such in nature (see, e.g., Ducor, 1998).

Under European law a patent may be granted when a substance found in
nature can be characterized by its structure, by its process of obtention or by other
criteria, if it is new in the sense that it was not previously available to the public. The
European Directive on Biotechnological Inventions (No. 96/9/EC of 11 March
1996) stipulates that ‘‘biological material which is isolated from its natural
environment or processed by means of a technical process may be the subject of
an invention even if it already occurred in nature’’ (article 3.2).

Under EU law the distinction between discovery (not patentable) and invention
(patentable) has generally been considered of a purely technical nature. However,
the Group of Advisers on the Ethical Implications of Biotechnology to the
European Commission (GAEIB) has taken the view in its Opinion on the Ethical
Aspects of Patenting Inventions Involving Elements of Human Origin of 25
September 1996, that such distinction involves, in the ﬁeld of biotechnology, a
particular ethical dimension (Van Overwalle, 2001, p. 54). According to the GAIEB,
patents for inventions issued from the knowledge of a human gene or a partial
human gene sequence are acceptable ‘‘only if, on the one hand, the identiﬁcation of
the function attached to a human gene, or a partial human gene sequence allows
new possibilities (for instance the production of new drugs), and, on the other hand,
if the intended use of the patent is sufﬁciently speciﬁc and identiﬁed’’.5 The ethical
dimension referred to is not perceived, hence, as a barrier to the patenting of
human genes.

This view, however, has not been unanimous in the European context. Con-
troversies continued after the approval of the Directive on Biotechnological
Inventions, which was challenged at the European Court of Justice by the govern-
ments of the Netherlands, Italy and Norway.6 As mentioned below, changes in
legislation were later introduced in some European countries in order to limit the
scope of patentability of human genes. Moreover, in the view of many European
experts, patents for elements from human origin are only justiﬁed if the element has
been essentially changed, which is not the case if its structure is identical to an
element to be found in the human body.7

As a result of the permissive policies of patent ofﬁces with regard to the
patenting of human genes, patent claims may assert rights over DNA in various
ways, as indicated, for example, in Box 1.

Moreover, a report found that nearly 20% of the human genome, or 4,382 of
the known 23,688 human genes, have been patented, with over half owned by
private companies. Around 63% of the patents are assigned to private ﬁrms, with
one ﬁrm, Incyte Pharmaceuticals/Incyte Genomics, holding patents covering 2,000
human genes. Some human genes, such as BRCA1, the gene linked to breast cancer,
are claimed by more than one company, with as many as 20 patents asserting rights
to various uses (Ravilious, 2005).

r  r 421

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

Box 1: How Genes can be Claimed

Patents over genes may cover one or more of the following:
 the DNA sequence, whether comprising a complete or partial gene
 promoters
 enhancers
 individual exons
 expressed sequences as expressed sequence tags (ESTs) or cDNAs
 whole transcribed genes as cDNAs
 individual mutations known to cause disease
 variation between people not associated with disease (polymorphisms)
 cloning vectors, formed from bacterial DNA, which are used to replicate DNA sequences
 expression vectors, also formed from bacterial DNA, which are used to express proteins in
replicated DNA sequences
 isolated host cells transformed with expression vectors, which are cells that have been
created to express particular proteins
 amino acid sequences (proteins)
 the use of such proteins as medicines
 antibodies, which are used as markers
 nucleic acid probes, which are fragments of DNA that are used to locate particular parts of
DNA sequences
 methods of identifying the existence of a DNA sequence or a mutation or deletion in an
individual
 testing kits for detecting genetic mutations

Source: based on Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics (2002, p. 25).

In the last instance, the prohibition against patenting products of nature in the
United States and other jurisdictions can be overcome through appropriate drafting
of the patent claims. All what is needed is to avoid claims on DNA sequences—or
other matters—in a naturally occurring form, by including claim language limiting
protection to isolated or puriﬁed forms.

In the light of these developments, an argument could be made that article 27.1
of the TRIPS Agreement is to be interpreted in accordance with the patenting
practices followed in major jurisdictions, as obligating members to grant patents
over genes, including human genes. Although subsequent state practices may be
taken into account, under some circumstances, for the interpretation of an inter-
national treaty, the main interpretive rule is based on the literal meaning of the
treaty provision.8 There are two important points in this regard.

First, like most patent laws in the world, the Agreement does not deﬁne
‘‘invention’’.9 The plain wording of article 27.1 suggests that members have been
left room to deﬁne it within their legal systems, in good faith, subject only to the
application of the method of interpretation set out by the Vienna Convention.10 If
the intention of the drafters of the TRIPS Agreement had been to require the
patenting of any subject matter that met the patentability criteria, they could have

422

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

alluded to any ‘‘subject matter that is new, involves an inventive step and is
capable of industrial application’’ rather than to the more substantive notion of
‘‘invention’’.

Moreover, the ordinary meaning of ‘‘invention’’ suggests the output of an
intellectual activity in the form of new knowledge of a technical nature. To invent is
‘‘to create by thought, originate (new method, instrument, etc.)’’.11 It also suggests a
distinction between creations and mere discoveries and, more generally, between
inventions and other subject matter that does not qualify as such.12 Generating
knowledge about a gene essentially is a scientiﬁc discovery.13 As indicated by the
Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics:

genes are naturally-occurring entities that are there to be discovered, like
new species or new planets. They are not invented. In our common usage
of the term, a ‘‘discovery’’ is the acquisition of knowledge of a new but
already existing fact about the world. An ‘‘invention,’’ on the other
hand, is something that someone creates or develops which did not
previously exist. Thus, on the usual interpretation of the words, it seems
apparent that the identiﬁcation of a gene is a discovery, since genes exist
in the world, in our bodies (Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics, 2002, p. 23).

This is consistent with the position according to which the process of isolation
or puriﬁcation may not be deemed as sufﬁcient to transform an existing substance
into something ‘‘invented’’. A report published by the WHO observed in this
regard:

It is argued that a normal or abnormal gene sequence is, in effect,
naturally occurring information which cannot therefore be patentable.
The counter-argument which has been used widely by patent lawyers,
that DNA sequence identiﬁcation is a form of puriﬁcation ‘‘outside the
body,’’ and therefore analogous to the puriﬁcation of naturally
occurring pharmacological agents, is specious; the DNA molecule is
not, in this context, important as a substance and its value resides in its
information content. Similar arguments have been used for patenting
complementary DNA sequences (cDNAs), that is DNA synthesized on a
messenger RNA template, which has no introns (i.e. sequences of DNA
that are not ultimately translated into the ﬁnal protein . . .). This is based
on the notion that a ‘‘natural’’ gene contains introns, and therefore
synthesizing complementary DNA is an ‘‘alteration’’ of nature and as
such amounts to a human invention. However . . . messenger RNA exists
in nature, and cDNA is just a translation of this sequence. In other
words it is rather like saying that the same invention could be repatented
if translated into a different language (WHO, 2002, p. 136).

Second, subsequent state practice may only be considered as an element for
treaty interpretation together with the context—as provided for by article 31.3(b) of

r  r 423

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

the Vienna Convention14—if ‘‘the practice is consistent, and is common to, or
accepted by, all the parties’’ (Aust, 2000, p. 194). Quite clearly, there is no such
common and accepted practice with regard to the concept of invention as applied to
genes.

While, as mentioned, genes are deemed patentable in some jurisdictions, many
countries have explicitly excluded them from patentability. Signiﬁcantly, no World
Trade Organization (WTO) member has raised any complaint so far under the
Dispute Settlement Understanding for this reason. Thus, Decision 486 of the
Andean Community considers non-patentable substances that pre-exist in nature.15
Similarly, the Mexican and Argentine laws exclude the patentability of substances
existing in nature, though it is unclear the extent to which isolated materials may be
deemed patentable in the case of Mexico. The 1996 Brazilian Industrial Property
Code (No. 9.279, 14 May 1996) is more precise in this respect. It excludes the
patentability of living beings or ‘‘biological materials found in nature’’, even if
isolated, including the ‘‘genome or germplasm’’ of any living being (article 10.IX).
The Biodiversity Law of Costa Rica (1998) establishes the non-patentability of
sequences of DNA per se.

In sum, WTO members may, consistently with the TRIPS Agreement, deter-
mine when an invention is deemed to exist as well as exclude patents for discoveries.
The extension of the concept of invention to genes and other matters found in
nature cannot be deemed universally accepted or incorporated into the TRIPS
Agreement. WTO members may, hence, legitimately exclude the patentability of
genes claimed in various forms, including human genes, as found in nature, even if
isolated or puriﬁed. In cases where genes were modiﬁed, and an invention be
deemed to exist, the patenting of genes may be excluded on other grounds, such as
morality grounds, as examined below.

The above conclusion is not altered if, as it is current practice in the United
States,16 DNA molecules are considered chemical substances and, hence, subject to
the general criteria of patentability of such substances. This approach is not only
conceptually questionable—as it overlooks that it is the informational content of
DNA molecules which makes them relevant for patent purposes—but it does not
overcome the basic objection to the patenting of substances merely found, not
invented.

A ﬁnal important question is whether a WTO panel or the Appellate Body
could, if a case were brought under the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU),
decide to provide their own interpretation of what an ‘‘invention’’ is and overrule a
domestically adopted concept thereon. If this were the case, such bodies would
exceed their authority, which is limited to the clariﬁcation of WTO rules.17 They are
not permitted to resolve ambiguities deliberately left in the text by the drafters of the
agreements and alter the delicate balance reached and the various compromises
made as an outcome of difﬁcult negotiations.18 The existence of gaps and ambi-
guities in the TRIPS Agreement indicates that members retained a certain amount
of room for maneuver at the national
level, which should not be limited by

424

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

interpretations that may eventually be provided by panels or the Appellate Body
(Jackson, 2000, pp. 184 and 186).

Micro-Organisms
Article 27.3(b) of the TRIPS Agreement (also known as the ‘‘biotechnological
clause’’) allows members to exclude from patent protection ‘‘plants and animals
other than micro-organisms, and essentially biological processes for the production
of plants or animals other than non-biological and microbiological processes’’.
However, the agreement requires members to provide for the protection of plant
varieties either by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any combina-
tion thereof.19

The expression ‘‘plants and animals other than micro-organisms’’ creates an
obligation to provide patent protection for the latter. The agreement does not deﬁne
what ‘‘micro-organisms’’ are. Can this obligation be construed as requiring the
granting of patents on genes, including human genes?

It has been held that the concept of micro-organisms would encompass all
kinds of microscopic biological materials. So deﬁned, they would include, for
instance, cells and genes.20 This expansive interpretation, however, does not
correspond to the ordinary meaning of the word. Like in the case of ‘‘invention’’
the interpretation of article 27.3(b) must proceed on the basis of the method set out
in the Vienna Convention, that is, in accordance with the ordinary meaning of the
words used in their context, taking into account the object and purpose of the
treaty.21 A ‘‘micro-organism’’ cannot be any biological matter; it must be an
‘‘organism’’, that is, an organized body with connected interdependent parts
sharing common life,22 which, in addition, is not visible to the naked eye.23 As
noted by Adcock and Llewelyn:

in the

The deﬁning property of micro-organisms is the microscopic size of the
individual. Their small dimension may have provided researchers with
the original motive for categorizing micro-organisms in a special group
separate from the plant and animal kingdoms. However, of equal
importance
their
morphology, activity, diversity, ﬂexibility of metabolism, ecological
distribution, and even their manipulation in the laboratory. Therefore,
the term ‘‘micro-organism’’ includes organisms that differ widely from
one another in form, life cycle and mode of life. This has meant that
there is no single deﬁnitive term that deﬁnes a ‘‘micro-organism’’ . . .
(Adcock and Llewelyn, 2000, p. 6).

classiﬁcation of micro-organisms

is

No complaint has been submitted to the WTO dispute settlement mechanism in
order to clarify, as provided for under the DSU, what the concept of micro-
organism is. The United States initiated a case against Argentina in 2000 arguing,
among other things, that Argentina was not duly implementing its obligation to
protect micro-organisms.24 The case was settled, however, at the consultation stage,

r  r 425

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

as the United States was satisﬁed with the implementation of Argentina’s obliga-
tions through Resolution No. 633/2001 of the Instituto Nacional de Propiedad
Industrial (INPI).25 This resolution recognized that patents would be conferred
over micro-organisms if they meet the patentability requirements, for instance
modiﬁed micro-organisms that are not part of the biological and genetic materials
‘‘as they exist in nature’’ (article 2). This resolution, however, did not mention at all
the patentability of genes.

In the light of the previous discussion about the concept of ‘‘invention’’, it is
clear that members may opt to comply with article 27.3(b) by providing a restricted
deﬁnition of ‘‘micro-organisms’’ and, eventually, by conﬁning patentability to
micro-organisms that have been modiﬁed. There is no obligation to grant patents
over micro-organisms found in nature or isolated therefrom, as they may be deemed
as a discovery and not an ‘‘invention’’. If a particular new use for such a micro-
organism were found, depending on national law, a patent may be granted on the
process for using the micro-organism, if inventive, but not necessarily on the micro-
organism as such.

Likewise, WTO members are not bound to protect genes as ‘‘micro-organims’’
or to apply a concept beyond the scientiﬁc meaning of the word.26 In the absence of
any clear deﬁnition, WTO members seem to have a considerable degree of freedom
to deﬁne micro-organisms in a reasonable way, as long as this can be defended
before a WTO dispute panel (Watal, 2001, p. 132).

Novelty
In addition to the just described ﬂexibilities, the TRIPS Agreement does not
determine how the ‘‘novelty’’ standard should be deﬁned for an invention to be
eligible for patent protection. This has permitted, for instance, the United States to
keep a relative novelty standard,27 despite the outcry of developing countries
against the patenting of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge
(‘‘bio-piracy’’).28

In the case of Europe, it is considered that the concept of ‘‘new’’ under the
novelty requirement does not mean ‘‘not preexisting’’ but ‘‘novel’’ in a prior art
sense, so that the unknown but natural existence of a product does not preclude the
product from the category of statutory subject matter.29 However, gene sequences
that code for a known protein are generally regarded as prima facie obvious,
although such was not the case in the earliest days of molecular biology. In the
United States, a ‘‘venerable line of cases holds that if a product is known in the art
already, an inventor cannot obtain a patent on the product merely by putting it to a
new use, ‘‘even if the result had not before been comtemplated’’ ’’ (Merges et al.,
1997, p. 174). However, the ﬂexibility of the novelty requirement has also permitted
the application of this requirement to DNA claims in a lax form. Thus, the doctrine
elaborated by a US court in Re Deuel (1995) paved the way for the patenting of
DNA in that country even when encoding known proteins, on the grounds that—

426

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

due to the degeneracy of the genetic code—their structure could not have been
predicted (Baldock, 1999, p. 21).

There is nothing in the TRIPS Agreement requiring member countries to follow
a particular approach in the application of the novelty standard. They may consider
that it is not ‘‘novel’’ and is, therefore, unpatentable, since it preexisted and was
known, such as known DNA sequences for which speciﬁc uses are found. In the
case of products existing in nature, the researcher’s only contribution (however
important it may be from a scientiﬁc point of view) can be deemed their disclosure,
isolation and description; novelty should not be confused with invention so as to
make of a discovery an invention (Pollaud-Dulian, 1997, p. 189).

Moral Exception

As mentioned, WTO members may refuse to grant patents over genes as such, based
on lack of compliance with conventional patentability requirements. In cases where
genes were admitted as patentable inventions, governments may still subject the
approval of patent applications to ethical considerations. Article 27.2 of the TRIPS
Agreement stipulates that:

Members may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention
within their territory of
the commercial exploitation of which is
necessary to protect ordre public or morality,
including to protect
human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to
the environment, provided that such exclusion is not made merely
because the exploitation is prohibited by domestic law.30

The concept of ‘‘morality’’ is relative to the values prevailing in a society at a
particular moment. Such values differ amongst cultures and countries, and change
over time. For instance, while the patenting of life forms, including plants and
animals, is not perceived as raising ethical concerns in United States or Europe, it
seems unacceptable in other cultural contexts. The African Group, for instance,
rejects such patenting of life forms as being unethical and contrary to basic cultural
values. It has actually proposed in the WTO a complete banning of patents over such
forms through an amendment to article 27.3(b) of the TRIPS Agreement.31

One important limitation for the application of article 27.2 is that a patent can
only be refused on moral grounds if the commercial exploitation of the invention
needs to be prevented to protect it. However, patent ofﬁces generally lack powers to
decide on the commercialization of a product; a decision by another competent
authority would seem necessary. In addition, the ﬁnal proviso (‘‘provided that such
exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited by domestic
law’’) indicates that a legal prohibition would not be sufﬁcient per se for the refusal
of a patent, which should be effectively based on moral considerations (or any of the
other grounds referred to in article 27.2).

r  r 427

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

Morality as an impediment to the grant of a patent has rarely been applied to
refuse a patent. In the Relaxine case,32 for instance, the European Patent Ofﬁce
(EPO) held that there was nothing immoral with the isolation of mRNA from the
tissue of pregnant women, and that the majority of the public accepts and desires
the research on the use of human materials for therapeutic applications. It added
that the patent in question did not give control over the human being and concluded
that DNA is not equal to ‘‘life’’. According to European law, in order to refuse a
patent on moral grounds, the ofﬁce has to establish whether an invention would be
so abhorrent for the public that its patenting would be inconceivable (Pollaud-
Dulian, 1997, pp. 173–4).

There are also more extreme views, arguing that ‘‘patenting, as such, is neither
wrong nor right, but could be classed as ‘‘ethically neutral’’. To refuse a patent
would be a futile gesture that would not by itself stop the invention being put to
practical use’’ (Crespi, 1997, p. 124).

However, the moral concerns about the patenting of DNA have received broad
international support. Thus, the International Bioethics Committee of UNESCO
(IBC) adopted by consensus on 14 September 2001 an ‘‘Advice on the patentability
of the human genome’’, indicating that ‘‘there are strong ethical grounds for
excluding the human genome from patentability’’. It recommended that:

the World Trade Organization (WTO), in its review of the TRIPS
Agreement, clarify that, in accordance with the provision of Article
27(2), the human genome is not patentable on the basis of the public
interest considerations set out therein,
in particular, ordre public,
morality and the protection of human life and health.

Likewise, the European Parliament issued a resolution on 4 October 2001 on
the Patenting of BRCA1 and BRCA2 (‘‘Breast Cancer’’) Genes calling on the EPO
‘‘to ensure that all . . . patent applications in Europe do not violate the principle of
non-patentability of humans, their genes or cells in their natural environment’’
(quoted in Van Overwalle, 2001, p. 56). It is to be noted that the EPO revoked on 18
May 2004, Myriad Genetics’ patent EP 699754 in response to an opposition by
Institut Curie and other entities, on the grounds of failure to comply with the
European Patent Convention.33

Process Protection
Countries that opt to restrict the patentability of genes and other biological
materials on the basis of a strict interpretation of article 27.1 and 27.3(b) of the
TRIPS Agreement may face a perhaps unexpected constraint: such a protection
may be indirectly obtained through the patenting of a process that permits, for
instance, an isolated gene to be obtained.

This issue is particularly relevant in the biotechnological ﬁeld, because in some
jurisdictions claims relating to products obtained with recombinant DNA technol-
ogy are deemed product-by-process claims. This has been, for example, the case of

428

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

the United Kingdom, where Lord Hoffmann stated in Biogen v Medeva that
‘‘recombinant’’ indicated the process by which the product was obtained (War-
ren-Jones, 2001, p. 80).

Process patents may be aggressively used to discourage or suppress competitors.
One illustration is offered by the legal actions brought about by Genetics Institute, a
US ﬁrm, in some Latin American countries. Genetics Institute was defeated in the
United States and Europe by Amgen in administrative and court cases with regard to
the rights over the gene that codiﬁes erythropoietin (Ca´ rdenas y Espinosa, 1997, pp.
61–4). Despite this, it has attempted to block the production and commercialization
of erythropoeitin by local companies based on a patent on a general method of
genetic engineering for the production, on a pre-industrial scale, of such product. The
revocation of that patent has been judicially requested at least in Argentina and Chile.
In accordance with article 28.1(b) of the TRIPS Agreement, the owner of a
process patent has the exclusive right to prevent third parties ‘‘from the acts of:
using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes at least the product
obtained directly by that process’’.

This provision would not apply when a product is obtainable by a patented
process; it must have been directly obtained by the use of such process. At least two
conditions should be met for this extended protection to arise:

(1)

(2)

there should be no material or important steps outside the scope of the patent
claims that intervene between the process and the product in question (see,
e.g., Bentley and Sherman, 2001, p. 493); and
the product must be the result of applying all the steps covered in the patent
(see, e.g., Hansen and Hirsch, 1997, p. 357).

If these conditions were met and it could be proven a direct relationship between
the application of the patented process and the product, exclusive rights could also be
exercised, in principle, with regard to the latter. Questions may arise, however, as to
whether this extension would apply when the patentability of the obtained product is
banned by law (e.g. in those cases where patents on genes are speciﬁcally excluded),
because if that were the case, the prohibition could be overridden, in practice, if the
product could only be obtained through the patented process.

Limiting the Scope of Genes’ Claims

As mentioned, the TRIPS Agreement allows members to decide whether to allow or
not patents over genes, including of human origin, on the basis of public policy
considerations. The legal treatment of genes is, in the last instance, an issue of
relevance to the design of scientiﬁc policies for the advancement of public health
and other national objectives. The value of scientiﬁc works

appears to the full with its further application by many minds and with
its free communications to other minds. Here any secrecy or any rights

r  r 429

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

of property possession will naturally have the effect of making
people off or preempted ﬁeld of work. In so doing,
they will
actually delay the intrinsic consequences of a discovery (Wiener, 1994,
p. 153).

This is particularly true in the case of gene patents. According to the already

mentioned WHO report:

DNA patenting is retarding rather than stimulating both scientiﬁc and
economic progress. The monopolies awarded by patents on genes as
novel chemicals are not therefore in the public interest and . . . this
unsatisfactory situation has important implications for the health of the
developing countries. In essence, it weakens the contribution of the
global research community to the creation and application of medical
technology for these countries, and, in the long-term, may complicate
the granting of concessional prices for therapeutic agents. In addition,
there are already signs that the position regarding the patenting of
proteins, more important products for generating these agents,
is
becoming even more chaotic than DNA patenting [quotations in the
text omitted ] (WHO, 2000, 137).

Developed countries have opted to grant gene patents as a means to promote
investment in research and development in this ﬁeld rather than invention. However,
given the deep North–South asymmetry in the capacity to exploit modern biotech-
nology, a narrow scope of patentability—rather than protection based on an
expansive interpretation of existing obligations under the TRIPS Agreement—
would be more suitable to the local economic and technological conditions of the
majority of developing countries. Although in most cases companies do not bother
to take out patents on DNA sequences in developing countries (WHO, 2005, p. 21)
the availability of patents on scientiﬁc discoveries or research tools my create an
additional hurdle for undertaking research in neglected areas, such as the diseases
prevailing among the poor.34

However,

if a country decides to protect genes,

it may establish speciﬁc
conditions and limitations for the granting of patents thereon in order to avoid
or reduce negative impacts. It may also seek to ensure that exceptions to the
exclusive rights, such as for experimentation purposes (see, e.g., Correa, 2005a;
2005b), are available.

Possible ways of limiting the scope of gene patents include conﬁning them to
modiﬁed genes, and to limit the claims to the functions effectively disclosed by the
applicant. For instance, in the view of a European expert:

industrial
a patent can be granted on an innovation capable of
like an
application, which relates to an element of human origin,
isolated gene, if this element has been essentially changed. It is not
essentially changed if the structure of the element is identical to an

430

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

element (gene) to be found in the human body or if the genetic
information is identical to the information of a human gene inside the
human body. The granting of a patent is justiﬁed for an innovation that
shows a new therapeutic application or use of a gene or a partial se-
quence of an even unchanged gene. In these cases—patent on process
and patent on product—the need to encourage European research and
the use of its results may outweigh other aspects. The patent must not
cover the gene itself, but the speciﬁc identiﬁed use of the gene.35

According to the conventional patent law approach, the inventor of a new
molecule can claim it in a way that covers possible future uses of the molecule, even
if unknown to him, if, in this case, such broad coverage may be justiﬁed to a certain
extent by the fact that a new substance has been created. When the same approach is
applied to patents over genes—which have not been invented but discovered—the
rationale for such solution seems clearly inappropriate. In addition,
it seems
ethically objectionable that the patent owner obtains rights beyond what he has
found and disclosed in the patent application.36

National laws can limit the protection to the speciﬁc use disclosed in the patent
application (‘‘purpose-bound protection’’), rather than extending it to a gene as
such (including functions not yet discovered). This kind of limitation to the patent
scope has been implemented for inventions concerning material isolated from the
human body in France and for human/primate gene sequences in Germany. There
is no apparent reason, however, to circumscribe this solution to genes of human
origin, because the same grounds would justify it for any other discoveries relating
to genes and other materials found in nature.

A ‘‘purpose-bound protection’’ does not limit research on non-disclosed
functions of a patented gene, by the same patent owner or third parties. Although
the adequateness of this approach, particularly in the light of articles 8, 9, 10 and 11
of the European Directive on Biotechnological Inventions, has been questioned by
the European Commission (European Commission, 2005, pp. 4–5) there is no
compelling reason, nor an obligation under the TRIPS Agreement, as reviewed
above, to legislate that the protection conferred by a patent extends to all possible
functions of a biological material, including those unknown to the patent applicant.

Conclusions

The TRIPS Agreement only obliges WTO members to protect subject matter,
including micro-organisms, that qualify as an ‘‘invention’’ under the domestic law of
the country of grant. Members are free to adopt their own notion of invention, subject
to the sole condition of compatibility with a good faith interpretation of the agree-
ment’s provision in accordance with the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
WTO members may exclude the patenting of genes. They are the building
blocks of nature and should remain free for use by the scientiﬁc community and for
any productive application. WTO members may also limit the scope of claims to the

r  r 431

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

uses or functions that have been actually identiﬁed and disclosed by the patent
applicant.

Given this broad room for maneuver, countries need to deﬁne what policy best
suits their current situation and development objectives.37 Those with a signiﬁcant
development in biotechnology38 may opt for some form of patent protection in this
area although, as noted above, such protection would not guarantee more and
better domestic research on the subject. Countries with scarce local research
capabilities or countries prioritizing medicine affordability and access may prefer
to impose restrictions on the patentability of substances existing in nature, including
genes. Other countries may deem patentability of living forms contrary to basic
cultural and ethical values, particularly in the case of human genes. All these
options are available to WTO members, if implemented consistently with the
general obligations (such as national treatment and the most-favored nation clause)
of the TRIPS Agreement.

About the Author

Carlos M. Correa is Director of the Center for Interdisciplinary Studies of Industrial
Property Law and Economics and of the Post-Graduate Courses on Intellectual
Property, University of Buenos Aires, Vicente Lopez, Buenos Aires, Argentina;
e-mail: ceidie@derecho.ubo.an

Notes

1 The Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, established in 1883 and

revised several times thereafter, left full freedom to contracting parties in this regard.
Rules on patentable subject matter could be found, in contrast, in the European Patent
Convention 1973.

2 At the inception of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

(GATT) in 1986, around 50 countries did not recognize product patents for
pharmaceuticals.

3 Developing countries and economies in transition were given transitional periods to

implement the new rules. The transitional period for least-developed countries,
originally provided for 2006, was extended to 2016. See Decision of the Council for
TRIPS on the Extension of the Transition Period under article 66.1 of the TRIPS
Agreement for least-developed country members for certain obligations with respect to
pharmaceutical products, WTO document IP/C/25 of 27 June 2002.

4 See, e.g., US Communication to the Council of TRIPS, IP/C/W/209, 3 October 2000

[online]. Available at hhttp://www.wto.orgi [Accessed on April 2007].

5 GAIEB, Opinion on Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions Involving Elements of

Human Origin, 25 September 1996 (Opinion 81).

6 The court dismissed the complaint. It held that the protection envisaged by the directive
covers only the result of inventive, scientiﬁc or technical work, and extends to biological
data existing in their natural state in human beings only where necessary for the
achievement and exploitation of a particular industrial application. The court concluded

432

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

that it was clear that, as regards to living matter of human origin, the directive framed
the law on patents in a manner sufﬁciently rigorous to ensure that the human body
effectively remains unavailable and inalienable and that human dignity is thus
safeguarded (Van Overwalle, 2001, p. 55).

7 See, e.g., Van Overwalle (2001, p. 54).
8 See articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969.
9 Some patent laws include a deﬁnition of ‘‘invention’’, but this is rather exceptional. For

instance, the Mexican patent law considers as an invention all human creation that
permits the transformation of matter or energy that exists in nature, for the beneﬁt of
man and to satisfy his concrete needs (article 15). The same concept is contained in the
Argentine patent law (article 4(a)).

10 Articles 31 and 32 of this Convention have been systematically applied in GATT and
WTO case law to interpret the provisions of the multilateral agreements, including the
TRIPS Agreement (see, e.g., Correa, 2005a; 2005b; Mengozzi, 1999).

11 The Concise Oxford Dictionary, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1989, p. 527.
12 Many patent laws make such a distinction. For instance, article 52(2) of the European
Patent Convention stipulates that ‘‘[T]he following in particular shall not be regarded as
inventions within the meaning of paragraph 1: (a) discoveries, scientiﬁc theories and
mathematical methods; (b) aesthetic creations; (c) schemes, rules and methods for
performing mental acts, playing games or doing business, and programs for computers;
(d) presentations of information’’.

13 See a discussion on this issue in Eisenberg (2000, p. 783).
14 In US-Section 110(5) of the US Copyright Act, for instance, a WTO panel referred to

examples of ‘‘state practice’’ of members of the Berne Union and the WTO, but it
warned that it ‘‘did not wish to express a view on whether these are sufﬁcient to
constitute ‘‘subsequent practice’’ within the meaning of article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna
Convention’’ (US-Section 110(5) of the US Copyright Act, WT/DS160/R (2000), at
paragraph 6.65, n. 68.

15 Article 15 of Decision 486: ‘‘The following shall not be considered inventions: . . . Any
living thing, either complete or partial, as found in nature, natural biological processes,
and biological material, as existing in nature, or able to be separated, including the
genome or germplasm of any living thing’’.

16 The US Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce considers DNA claims as relating to ‘‘composition

of matter’’ (see, e.g., WHO, 2000, p. 137).

17 Article 3.2 of the DSU expressly prevents panels and the Appellate Body from adding

rights and obligations when adjudicating disputes.

18 In Canada-Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical Products, the panel alerted against
interpretation that ‘‘would be equivalent to a renegotiation of the basic balance of the
Agreement’’ (WT/DS114/R, 2000, at section 7.26).

19 The provisions of article 27.3(b) were subject to review four years after the date of entry
into force of the WTO Agreement. This review, though initiated, was never concluded,
due to major differences between developed and developing countries on its mandated
scope. Given the lack of progress on the matter, the Doha Ministerial Declaration
included the following mandate in paragraph 19: ‘‘We instruct the Council for TRIPS, in
pursuing its work programme including under the review of Article 27.3(b), the review of

r  r 433

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

the implementation of the TRIPS Agreement under Article 71.1 and the work foreseen
pursuant to paragraph 12 of this declaration, to examine, inter alia, the relationship
between the TRIPS Agreement and the Convention on Biological Diversity, the
protection of traditional knowledge and folklore, and other relevant new developments
raised by members pursuant to Article 71.1. In undertaking this work, the TRIPS
Council shall be guided by the objectives and principles set out in Articles 7 and 8 of the
TRIPS Agreement and shall take fully into account the development dimension’’.

20 See, e.g., Watal (2001, p. 132), noting that under the practice of the EPO cells and parts

thereof are treated as micro-organisms (see also Adcock and Llewelyn, 2000, p. 10).

21 See article 31.1 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
22 Supra, n. 11, p. 719.
23 Ibid., p. 639.
24 With regard to the patentability of micro-organisms and other matter, the United States

sought consultations referring to the patentability of: (a) micro-organisms per se (e.g.
yeasts, bacteria, unicellular organisms); (b) a composition that includes as one element a
micro-organism (e.g. a culture containing a yeast, bacterium, etc.); (c) a chemical
compound per se (i.e. the chemical compound not in combination with other materials);
(d) a composition containing a chemical compound that had an industrial application
other than use as a pharmaceutical composition; (e) a chemical compound or a puriﬁed
composition containing a chemical compound (in the form of a nucleic acid comprising
a speciﬁed sequence of nucleoside [i.e. a nucleotide sequence]; a peptide, polypeptide or
protein [i.e. an amino acid sequence]; a lipid; or a polysaccharide); (f) a chemical
compound having a structure identical to a chemical compound isolated from a plant,
animal, micro-organism or other naturally occurring sources; (g) a puriﬁed composition
containing a chemical compound having a structure identical to a chemical compound
isolated from a plant, animal, micro-organism or other naturally occurring source, such
that the composition is not identical to a composition containing the chemical
compound as it would be found in its natural state; and (h) a chemical compound or a
composition containing that compound where the composition does not have a
predominantly pharmaceutical application. See WT/DS171/3, WT/DS196/4, IP/D/18/
Add.1, IP/D/22/Add.1, 20 June 2002.

25 Ofﬁcial Gazette, 22 October 2001.
26 The scientiﬁc notion of micro-organism encompasses a member of one of the following

classes: bacteria, fungi, algae, protozoa or viruses (Coombs, 1986, p. 198).

27 Section 102: ‘‘A person shall be entitled to a patent unless the invention was known or
used by others in this country, or patented or described in a printed publication in this or
a foreign country, before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent, or the
invention was patented or described in a printed publication in this or a foreign country
or in public use or on sale in this country, more than one year prior to the date of the
application for patent in the United States . . .’’ (35 US Code).

28 For instance, US patent No. 5.401.504 was awarded to the University of Mississippi
Medical Center, in March 1995, over the ‘‘Use of Turmeric in Wound Healing’’, which
covered ‘‘a method of promoting healing of a wound by administering turmeric to a
patient afﬂicted with the wound’’. The powder of the turmeric plant was, however, a
classic ‘‘grandmother’s remedy’’ in India. It had been applied to the scrapes and cuts of

434

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

generations of children. Upon request of the India’s Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial
Research (CSIR), the US Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce invalidated the patent on 14
August 1997 after ascertaining that there was no novelty. The lack of novelty was held on
the basis of a 1953 article in the Journal of the Indian Medical Association and on
Ayurvedic texts. On the contrary, in 1986, after research in Ecuadorian Amazonia, a US
scientist was granted US plant patent No. 5.751 relating to a variety of the ayahuasca vine
(Banisteriopsis caapi). Ayahuasca is a plant used for many medicinal and ritual purposes
and is a sacred plant for many indigenous peoples of Amazonia. The patent was
challenged by several non-governmental organizations, re-examined and revoked in 1999,
but it was re-instated by the US Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce in 2001 as it was found that
novelty had not been destroyed prior to the application (see, e.g., Correa, 2002).

29 In accordance with the Guidelines of Examination of the EPO, ‘‘To ﬁnd a substance
freely occurring in nature is also mere discovery and therefore unpatentable. However, if
a substance found in nature has ﬁrst to be isolated from its surroundings and a process
for obtaining it is developed, that process is patentable. Moreover, if the substance can
be properly characterised either by its structure, by the process by which it is obtained or
by other parameters . . . and it is ‘‘new’’ in the absolute sense of having no previously
recognised existence, then the substance per se may be patentable . . . An example of
such a case is that of a new substance which is discovered as being produced by a
microorganism’’ (Part C [IV], 2.1).

30 For an interpretation of this article, see UNCTAD-ICTSD (2005, pp. 375–83).
31 See WTO document IP/C/W/163, 8 November 1999 [online]. Available at hhttp://

www.wto.orgi [Accessed on April 2007].

32 See the Interlocutory Decision of the Technical Board of Appeal 3.3.4 dated 15 April

1999, T 272/95—3.3.4.

33 An opposition division of the EPO also ruled that Myriad Genetics’ patent EP705902,
could only be maintained in an amended form. This patent protects a DNA testing kit
for the detection of mutations in the BRCA1 gene for the diagnosis of breast cancers.
The amended patent claims no longer include claims for therapeutic and diagnostic
methods (Thompson Current Patents Gazzette, Issue 0504, 28 January 2005, available at
hhttp://scientiﬁc.thomson.com/media/cdjournals/gazettenews/2005/CPG_News_
0504.pdfi [Accessed on April 2007]). Other patents of Myriad Genetics’ relating to the
BRCA2-gene (EP 705903 and EP 785216) were also maintained, after review, in an
amended form (EPO Press releases of 25 January 2005 and 29 July 2005, available at
hhttp://www.european-patent-ofﬁce.org/news/pressrel/index.htmi[Accessed on April
2007]).

34 There is a growing body of literature on the issue of research tools. For a discussion that
takes the development dimension into account, see Commission on Intellectual Property
Rights (2002).

35 Opinion by Dietmar Mieth, GAIEB, Opinion on Ethical Aspects of Patenting

Inventions Involving Elements of Human Origin, 25 September, 1996 (Opinion 81)
(quoted in Van Overwalle, 2001, p. 54).

36 The application of copyright has been suggested by many scholars as a less restrictive
mode of protecting genetic creations (see, e.g., Clavier, 1998, p. 283). Under copyright,
only the expression of ideas, and not the latter as such, are protected.

r  r 435

Carlos M. Correa

Patenting Human DNA

37 See the ‘‘Development Agenda’’ submitted to the World Intellectual Property

Organization by Argentina and Brazil, and supported by the group ‘‘Friends of
Development’’ in WIPO document WO/GA/31/11, 27 August 2004 [online]. Available
at hhttp://www.wipo.inti [Accessed on April 2007].

38 For a review of the situation of medical biotechnology in some developing countries, see

Nature Biotechnology (2004) and Sasson (2005).

References

Adcock, M. and Llewelyn, M. (2000) Micro-organisms, Deﬁnitions and Options Under TRIPS

and Micro-organisms, Deﬁnitions and Options under TRIPS: Supplementary Thoughts,
QUNO, Occasional Paper 2, Geneva.

Aust, A. (2000) Modern Treaty Law and Practice. Cambrige University Press, Cambridge.
Baldock, C. (1999) ‘Patenting of ESTs’, Patent World, March.
Bentley, L. and Sherman, B. (2001) Intellectual Property Law. Oxford University Press, New

York.

Ca´ rdenas y Espinosa (1997) Aspectos Tecnol ´ogicos de las Patentes. Ediciones del Equilibista,

M ´exico.

Chisum, D. and Jacobs, M. (1992) Understanding Intellectual Property Law. Matthew

Bender, New York.

Clavier, J.-M. (1998) Les cat ´egories de la propri ´et ´e intellectuelle a l’ ´epreuve des cr ´eations

g ´en ´etiques. L’Harmattan, Paris.

Commission on Intellectual Property Rights (2002) Integrating Intellectual Property Rights

and Development Policy: Report of the Commission on Intellectual Property Rights,
London [online]. Available at hhttp://www.iprcommission.org/graphic/documents/
ﬁnal_report.htmi [Accessed on March 2007].

Coombs, J. (1986) Macmillan Dictionary of Biotechnology. Macmillan, London, p. 198.
Correa, C. (2002) Protection and Promotion of Traditional Medicine. Implications for Public

Health in Developing Countries, South Centre, Geneva.

Correa, C. (2005a) International Dimension of the Research Exception [online]. SIPPI Project,

AAAS, Washington, DC. Available at hhttp://sippi.aaas.org/intlexemption
paper.shtmli [Accessed on March 2007].

Correa, C. (2005b) ‘The TRIPS Agreement from the Perspective of Developing Countries’, in
P. Macrory, A. Appleton and M. Plummer (eds), The World Trade Organization: Legal,
Economic and Political Analysis. Springer, New York.

Crespi, S. (1997), ‘Biotechnology Patents and Morality’, Trends in Biotechnology, 15(4),

123–9.

Ducor, P. (1998) Patenting the Recombinant Products of Biotechnology and Other Molecules.

Kluwer Law International, London.

Eisenberg, R. (2000) ‘Re-Examining the Role of Patents in Appropriating the Value of DNA

Sequences’, Emory Law Journal, 49, 783.

European Commission (2005) Report from the Commission to the Council and the European
Parliament. Development and Implications of Patent Law in the Field of Biotechnology and
Genetic Engineering (SEC(2005) 943), COM(2005) 312 ﬁnal, Brussels, 14 July.

436

r  r Patenting Human DNA

Carlos M. Correa

Hansen, B. and Hirsch, F. (1997) Protecting Inventions in Chemistry. Commentary on

Chemical Case Law Under the European Patent Convention and the German Patent Law.
WILEY-VCH, Weinheim.

Jackson, J. (2000) The Jurisprudence of GATT and the WTO. Cambrige University Press,

Cambridge.

Mengozzi, P. (1999) ‘The World Trade Organization Law: An Analysis of Its First Practice’.
International Trade Law on the 50th Anniversary of the Multilateral Trade System 26
Giuffre` , Milan, pp. 271–315.

Merges, R., Menell, P., Lemley, M. and Jorde, T. (1997) Intellectual Property in the New

Technological Age. Aspen Law & Business, New York.

Nature Biotechnology (2004) Health Biotechnology Innovation in Developing Countries

[online], December, 22 (supplement). Available at hhttp://www.utoronto.ca/jcb/home/
news_nature.htmi [Accessed on March 2007].

Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics (2002) ‘The Ethics of Patenting DNA’. A Discussion Paper,

London.

Perez Pugatch, M. (2004) The International Political Economy of Intellectual Property Rights.

Edward Elgar, Cheltenham.

Pollaud-Dulian, F. (1997) ‘La Brevetabilit ´e des inventions. Etude comparative de

jurisprudence’, France-OEB, Le Droit des Affaires, No. 16, Paris.

Ravilious, K. (2005) ‘Private Companies Own Human Gene Patents’. The Guardian, 14

October.

Sasson, A. (2005) Medical Biotechnology. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development—International Centre for Trade and
Sustainable Development (2005) Resource Book on TRIPS and Development. Cambridge
University Press, New York.

Van Overwalle, G. (2001) European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the

European Commission, Study on the Patenting of Inventions Related to Human Cell
Research. European Commission, Brussels.

Warren-Jones, A. (2001) Patenting rDNA. Human and Animal Biotechnology in the United

Kingdom and Europe. Lawtext Publishing, Witney.

Watal, J. (2001) Intellectual Property Rights in the WTO and Developing Countries. Kluwer

Law International, The Hague.

Wiener, N. (1994) Invention. The Care and Feeding of Ideas. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
World Health Organization (2002) ‘Genomics and World Health’. Report of the Advisory

Committee on Health Research, Geneva.

World Health Organization (2005) ‘Genetics, Genomics and the Patenting of DNA’. Review of

Potential Implications for Health in Developing Countries. WHO, Geneva.

r  r 437


