The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4, pp. 150–167

doi: 10.1002/jwip.12010

Bioprospecting in the High Seas: Regulatory
Options for Beneﬁt Sharing

Morten Walløe Tvedt
Fridtjof Nansen Institute

Ane E. Jørem
Fridtjof Nansen Institute

Judging from the debates on the international political scene, the legal regime for the marine areas beyond national
jurisdiction might be changing in the years to come. One recurring question is whether and how future international
law should incorporate the issue of sharing the beneﬁts that arise from utilizing marine genetic resources (MGRs). In
reviewing these questions, this work outlines some of the regulatory options for addressing the activity of
bioprospecting in the high seas. De lege ferendae the activity of bioprospecting will likely give rise to a wide range of
legislative alternative forms of beneﬁt sharing. These must be consistent with the fundamental principle of freedom of
the high seas and the exclusive rights awarded by patents when the activity results in an invention; yet they should also
have advantages in terms of conserving MGRs, promoting fairness and spurring innovation. When emphasis is placed
on maintaining the incentives to innovate, there are important drawbacks to monetary beneﬁt sharing. On the other
hand, open or semi-open source options can be conceived for the material relating to MGRs. This article identiﬁes
important practical implications and unresolved legal and practical questions for owners of sampled material and for
third-party users.

Keywords access and beneﬁt sharing; bioprospecting; high seas; marine genetic resources

Introduction

Bioprospecting, the search for new and useful biological and genetic resources, is taking place in the high
seas. These expeditions, often referred to as “cruises”, fulﬁl a range of different purposes, from pure
academic, taxonomic mapping of species occurrence, to commercially oriented exploitation of marine
genetic resources (MGR). Despite this activity, knowledge of marine life, species and genetic resources is
still limited. The current and future legal status of MGR and bioprospecting in areas beyond national
jurisdiction (ABNJ) has been the subject of debate for several years, though discussions have yet to
provide answers that inspire consensus. Furthering these discussions necessitates exploring the points of
intersection of several regimes of international law. The use of the high seas is governed by the law of the
sea, as reﬂected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).1 Patent law provides
a system for establishing exclusive rights to inventions, including to those based on biological material,
regardless of where the material was found (Tvedt, 2010). The rationale for sharing beneﬁts that arise from
MGR comes inter alia from the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)2 and its Nagoya Protocol
(NP),3 which does not directly apply to ABNJ, apart from what ﬂag state legislation may warrant. The
balance between patents and other rights to genetic resources that the CBD seeks to establish through
Access and Beneﬁt Sharing (ABS) is absent for ocean resources. Free and open access, combined with
applicability of exclusive rights through the patent system, prompts the question of whether there is need
for a feedback mechanism also in the case of genetic resources in the high seas.

Sharing of beneﬁts from the utilization of MGR remains a controversial topic. In this article, we
explore two main proposals for beneﬁt sharing from bioprospecting for marine resources in the high seas:
monetary sharing from utilization of MGRs and sharing of genetic material itself. Subsequently, we

150

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

discuss institutional options for beneﬁt sharing for the high seas. As the MGR in the Area4 have generated
more overt debate and a more substantial body of literature5 than those in the high seas, this article focuses
on the particularities of the high seas. Before analysing concrete alternatives for the roads ahead, we will
ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce the state of discussions on a possible future regulation of MGR in ABNJ, and second,
develop criteria for assessing the two proposals.

State of the Discussions on MGRs in ABNJ

The main forum in which the question of possible beneﬁt sharing from the utilization of high seas MGR is
the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues relating the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction (hereinafter the Working Group),
established by the United Nations General Assembly.6 Present in meetings of the Working Group are
chieﬂy representatives of states, but also intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations. The mandate of the Working Group includes indicating options “to promote cooperation
and coordination for the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction”.7 Some see in the mere establishment of the discussion forum an evident preparing
of ground for regimes that regulate the exploitation of genetic resources in ABNJ (Treves, 2010, p. 17).
As common ground, delegations value the conservation of MGR and the importance of scientiﬁc
research.8 Concerning the exploitation of MGR, the only consensus so far seems to be the need to improve
knowledge on existing activities,
the marine environment
(Broggiato, 2011, p. 185). While several parties to UNCLOS are eager to move the debate further, the
discussions testify to the long-lasting impasse between partisans and objectors to the idea of deﬁning
MGRs in ABNJ as “common heritage of mankind”.9 As an alternative option, the EU suggested in 2008
taking the multilateral mechanism under the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture (ITPGRFA)10 as a reference point for the discussions.11 Though most parties welcomed the
proposal (Broggiato, 2008, p. 186), it has so far not lead to concrete proposals in subsequent meetings.
Despite the lack of concrete text proposals, delegates to Rio þ 20 took only a few weeks after the

their costs and implications

for

2012 meeting of the Working Group, note of the work of the group and committed “on an urgent basis” to
address the issues of conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity in ABNJ, “including by
taking a decision on the development of an international instrument under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea”.12 Even if parties agree that MGR are common heritage of mankind, this does not
necessarily provide clear guidance on how a beneﬁt-sharing scheme shall be construed. For as Leary
explains, that regime is tailored for mineral resource exploitation and does not answer how beneﬁt sharing
would be done when inventions are patent protected (Leary, 2009, p. 366). Also when plant genetic
resources were recognized as common heritage (before the 1980s) no system for beneﬁt sharing from
utilization of these resources was in place. In this situation, proposals on beneﬁt-sharing options often take
a quite general form. It is therefore all the more important that the academic discussion strives towards
ﬂeshing out concrete possibilities.

Criteria for Outlining and Evaluating Regulatory Options

In this article, we aim to contribute to the ongoing discussions by exploring two regulatory options for
bioprospecting in the high seas. These two policy options will be evaluated on their capacity to spur
innovation, promote conservation and ensure sustainable use of marine biodiversity, and whether a policy
presents a fair option.

A ﬁrst criterion is that of the potential of a regulation to spur innovation. This includes basic academic
and scientiﬁc innovation that furthers knowledge of the ocean, and the commercial development of

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

151

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

applications of biological diversity that lead to new products available on the market. A major source of
scepticism towards ABS in general, voiced by certain developed states, is that regulation will put an
unnecessary strain on the creators of innovation, that is industry and businesses, thus constituting a
disincentive to innovate.13 Though not a new argument, it should be seen in relation to the economic
downturn of recent years.14 In an industry where R&D is the fundamental ingredient of the innovation
wanted by all parties, avoiding unnecessary strain on the creators of innovation is paramount. Often the
availability of intellectual property rights (IPR) protection, as patents, is considered important. Therefore,
any proposed scheme must correlate positively with innovation and be aware of any links to IPR and
patents in particular.

Conservation, a second criterion, is here understood as both in situ and ex situ conservation of
biodiversity. As deﬁned in CBD article 2, in situ conservation is “the conservation of ecosystems and
natural habitats and the maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural
surroundings […]”.15 Ex situ conservation is the “conservation of components of biological diversity
outside their natural habitats”.16 An example of ex situ conservation is keeping reproductive material in
collections as a resource for research, or for reintroduction of endangered species into the wild. It should
be reiterated here that CBD does not apply to ABNJ,17 and it is not obvious that the deﬁnitions of this
Convention would prevail in a setting relating to the law of the sea. Conservation of marine biodiversity ex
situ is second best to maintaining biodiversity in situ. Ex situ conservation is connected to spurring
innovation insofar as marine material in a collection will be more accessible as the raw material for
innovation compared to the innovator having to search for it in wild. The collections of plant genetic
resources have been crucial in plant breeding; keeping collections of marine material could have a similar
potential.

Sustainable use, as a sub-notion of sustainable development,18 reﬂects two key concepts, that of a
present and future need; and that “of limitations imposed by the state of technology and social
organization on the environment’s ability to meet present and future needs”.19 Here the resources used are
MGR and therefore the question is how well policy proposals reﬂect their sustainable use.

Fairness is often taken to refer to general conceptions of what is just and morally right. On an
international level, the concept of fairness often refers to the general North–South gap in development and
that between the bioprospector and the involuntary bystander.20 Despite different existing notions of
fairness, the discussions here are inspired by a Rawlsian perspective, as described in A Theory of Justice
(Rawls, 1999). The essence of this conception of fairness is that any new legal tool must contribute at least
so that the worse off be put in a slightly better position. Although Rawls did not himself apply his theory to
international issues without modiﬁcation (Rawls, 1993, pp. 36–68, 1999, pp. 331–5), his ideas can inspire
the discussion on marine bioprospecting. With respect to marine biological material, fairness could play
an even greater part than in the CBD, under which the sharing the beneﬁts that arise from utilization of GR
ideally entails a return of said beneﬁts to a national or local entity in a provider country, thus creating an
incentive to safeguard and conserve biodiversity.21 Since there is no providing or conserving party in the
high seas, it can be argued that, compared to the situation under the CBD, ABS for the high seas could fulﬁl
a function that is more redistributive of means and know-how, than conservationist.

We set out as the task of this article to examine two legal proposals in the light of these four criteria:

potential for new innovation, conservation, sustainable use and fairness.

First Policy Option: A Global Multilateral Benefit-Sharing Fund
This section examines one possible modality for ABS for the high seas, namely monetary beneﬁt sharing.
Since there are no sovereign rights of states to MGR in the high seas as is the basis for beneﬁt sharing under
the CBD, it is most relevant to discuss a global system for sharing beneﬁts. If a mechanism is multilateral,
it could take the form of a fund that serves as focal point and administers the monetary transactions.

152

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

In a scenario where money is to be transferred to a fund to be shared later, one question is whether
contributions from bioprospectors or subsequent product developers should be mandatory or voluntary. If
voluntary, contributions to the fund would depend on the incentives of bioprospectors, industry and other
possible contributors. The possibility of making voluntary contributions would not affect the economical
assessments of a company considering engaging in bioprospecting; it would thus not inhibit innovation in
any way. On the other hand, there is a risk that a fund would simply not be used, and that there would be
only symbolic funds available for the promotion of fairness, innovation, conservation or sustainable use. It
is not easy to imagine what incentives could be envisaged that would make a company or a university
contribute to such a fund.

If contributions are mandatory, an obligation has to be triggered at a speciﬁc point, be it during
bioprospecting or at any subsequent stage in research or commercialization. When identifying trigger
points, parallel questions to implementation of ABS in the CBD arise.22 It must, for example, take heed of
the widespread discussion about distinguishing academic research from commercial purposes. For the
sake of promoting innovation, these triggers would have to be set in a legally predictable and objectively
determined manner, so that investors and bioprospectors could have a good basis for making a decision on
exploitation of MGR (Young and Tvedt, 2009, p. 115).

One such trigger could be the initial moment at which any legal or natural person has established a
wish to conduct a cruise. The question is what the implications would be of choosing this early trigger. At
that point in time, different bioprospectors will have different intentions, not to mention that different
actors might participate on board the same ship conducting a cruise. If the aim is to make obligations fall
only on commercially oriented bioprospecting, by exempting academic cruises from the scope of beneﬁt-
sharing requirements, this trigger might incentivise commercial cruises to sail under an academic ﬂag.
Such an early trigger could end up not generating much monetary beneﬁts for the promotion of
conservation, sustainable use and fairness.

The time lag between conducting a commercial bioprospecting cruise and achieving commercial
success can be long. To put a monetary obligation on the event of the cruise as the trigger point could
reduce the incentive to innovate. If the aim is to make no distinction of pure and applied sciences, it should
be noted that no commercial beneﬁts have been created at this moment. Especially if the obligation takes
the form of monetary beneﬁts, this trigger can be perceived as a tax placed on an intention to pursue
research. Opting for a trigger point closer to actual commercialization would likely be more conducive to
promoting a fair system that encourages innovation.

In the discussions leading up to the establishing of the NP under the CBD, an expert group suggested
a list of speciﬁc categories of utilizations and sub-activities, including genetic modiﬁcation, biosynthesis,
cultivation or production of compounds of naturally occurring materials.23 One or more of these
speciﬁc acts of utilization could be set as the trigger points for a beneﬁt-sharing obligation for resources
in the high seas. Choosing speciﬁc acts of utilization will establish a legally certain situation by being
objectively veriﬁable (Tvedt and Young, 2007, pp. 66–8). What is retained here is that utilization
can be categorized by stage of development from collection to product development (Tvedt and
Young, 2007, p. 67). If the intention for a high seas beneﬁt-sharing mechanism is to leave academic
research untouched, such actions could be associated with commercial use. Whenever triggering action is
discussed, the granting of a patent is often mentioned. This action could provide a clear point of
demarcation for commercialization. However, historically non-commercial actors, such as universities,
are increasingly seeking patent protection. Concerning monetary beneﬁts, a granted patent does not
automatically indicate whether any economic beneﬁt has accrued to the party, because the entry into
market of an invention may lie years ahead (Salpin and Germani, 2007, p. 16). If obligations were
triggered before revenue is gained, bioprospectors and industry would have to factor in yet another cost to
the already risky investment. It could be perceived as taxing risk-taking. Its effect on willingness to

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

153

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

explore and innovate is hard to assess, but some would doubtlessly see the trigger as a disincentive to
innovation.

A related option may prove better able to spur innovation: the granting of a patent could trigger a
suspended obligation. “Suspended obligation” implies that an action in the present establishes an
obligation in the future. This suspended obligation would then be triggered pending the realization of
certain commercial successes occurring at a later stage. Such a suspended obligation would not impede
innovation, but may be effective in providing funds for conservation and may contribute to the fair
sharing.

An even later triggering moment could be set, for instance when the revenues from a commercial
application exceed a particular sum or when the product has been on the market for a certain period of
time. This would require patience in relation to some inventions. In terms of incentives, the sense of
entitlement to the product will presumably grow as the moment of access recedes into the past, and beneﬁt
sharing will seem less and less natural in the eyes of the patent holder. Several years may pass from the
sampling to the launching of a patented product. This is of particular relevance to the pharmaceutical
industry where extensive trials are required. Uncertain but recurring indications estimate up to 15 years to
develop a product in this sector.24 The advantage of setting a particular gross net sum as a trigger is
particularly appropriate with regard to the fair
treatment of unsuccessful or semi-successful
bioprospecting enterprises: one does not incur an obligation before beneﬁts have arisen. In the absence
of beneﬁts, there seems to be little reason to adhere to a redistributive objective. On the other hand, it could
arguably be taken as a penalty for success, and discourage the considerable investments needed for this
particular form of innovation. In addition, targeting only the publicly successful ventures might
incentivise companies to conceal when or where the actual beneﬁts have been earned. This could be
compensated to a certain extent by opting for forms of beneﬁts other than monetary, such as the sharing of
knowledge or information on samples.

A challenging question is how far away from the original sampled material the beneﬁt-creating
process can go before participation in a fund model becomes no longer necessary.25 The question is what
degree of similarity would be required for the obligation to be triggered. The answer lies somewhere
between two extremes: where MGR have been a candidate in the research process, but not making their
way into the ﬁnal product; and the direct use of for instance a sampled micro-organism being used as a
product in itself. This question is not particular to marine bioprospecting, it applies to all types of ABS, and
has received surprisingly little attention.

Summing up, in order to promote innovation, the drafting of the trigger point for a mandatory solution
requires legal predictability and must be set to an externally veriﬁable incident. Setting the trigger point
into the future, will require more trust or a stronger system for control as the situation evolves with time.
If one assumes that possible obligations fall upon patentees with commercially successful inventions
and only these, mandatory obligations would have to be surveyed to ensure compliance. Effective
implementation of any such requirement could involve relying on the patent system. This would require
resolving the controversial issue of disclosure of origin in patent applications.26 Given the increasing
tendency of universities to seek patent protection of their research results, a possibility is to target these
users of biodiversity for particular beneﬁt-sharing measures. Compulsory co-ownership of IPR would not
be easily compatible with the fundamental exclusivity of the rights awarded to the inventor by a patent, so
it would be difﬁcult to establish a mandatory system. One could, however, invite universities to share and
set up a practical system of ownership sharing for these patents with colleagues in disadvantaged states
based on contracts. Participation of the wider scientiﬁc community could spur global innovation and not
only meet the fairness objective. The drawback is that, if it is perceived as a burden on universities, they
may become less attractive as partners to industry, and could in turn undermine efforts to promote
innovation.

154

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Sovereignty of the user country will, however, impede a change necessary to make the system
functional, as requirements necessarily need to be transferred into domestic law to become binding. Not all
user countries are likely to impose the same obligations on their domestic biotechnology.

For the sake of not impeding innovation, the literature recognizes the importance of an end point for
the obligation (Drankier et al., 2012, p. 385; Young and Tvedt, 2009, pp. 23–4). An end point would
increase economic predictability for a potential investor. On the other hand, one could argue that setting an
end point does not necessarily affect the incentive to invent, because an obligation late in the life cycle of a
product affects the innovation decision less than a monetary obligation early in the cycle. A bioprospector
would probably not refrain from conducting a cruise and subsequent research because of monetary beneﬁt
sharing happening more than 20 years into the future. For conservation and sustainable use, there is no
logic in deﬁning an end point to the beneﬁt-sharing obligation.

A further question that arises is that of who should be at the receiving end of monetary beneﬁts. This is
a challenge both for mandatory and voluntary models. There are many possible, worthy beneﬁciaries that
could be envisaged for the conservation of biodiversity. Given the lack of investment in high seas
conservation and protection of marine environments over the decades, recipients dedicated to the oceanic
realm are likely candidates. To ensure an emphasis on conservation of the marine environment, a fund may
transfer beneﬁts to states, regional and global organizations or NGOs with speciﬁc conservation projects,
inter alia marine protected areas. Funding could be awarded to research institutions for science projects
relating to the loss of marine biodiversity or understanding marine life and diversity. In such a scenario,
beneﬁt sharing from bioprospecting would constitute a payment for the ecosystem services provided by
the oceans to the whole of humanity, and be directed to preserving biodiversity, encouraging sustainable
use, or fair sharing. It could also represent an incentive to conduct certain types of research rather than
others. Theoretically, a high sea ABS system could even contribute to the conservation of mainland
biodiversity and counter the practical shortcomings of beneﬁt sharing in the CBD. To sum up, several
political and technical constrains must be resolved for both mandatory and voluntary fund models. It is
important, when discussing technical solutions, to be aware of which objectives are considered most
important.

In the following, we ask whether certain forms of non-monetary options for high seas ABS may meet

the set criteria more easily.

Second Policy Option: Creating a Common Pool of Sampled MGR
One approach to non-monetary beneﬁt sharing would be to establish a common pool of biological material
retrieved from the high seas (Greiber, 2011, pp. 36, 46–7). We will in this section explore how such an
option could be conceived.

A common pool option draws on an open source approach, developed in the world of computer
programming and software.27 It shares some of the emerging ideas concerning a common pooling of
biotechnological research and development (Tvedt, 2013),28 along with the existing regime in the high
seas. Non-monetary beneﬁts could well hold a value that could lead to creation of economic values. They
are regularly regrouped in a CBD-NP setting to include inter alia sharing of research results or samples,
cooperation in scientiﬁc research and admittance to ex situ facilities or information databases.29 Thus one
non-monetary obligation could be to deposit a sample or a certain quantity of biological material in a
common ex situ collection. Such an obligation would ﬁnd a great advantage in not needing to differentiate
between academic and commercially oriented cruises, as samples to a collection could be provided
equally by any of them.

Biological resources in situ in the high seas seem to be common pooled resources, as the freedom of
the high seas applies.30 The general idea we explore here is to deposit duplicate samples retrieved from the
high seas in a public trust ex situ collection to be made available to others in a non-exclusive or partially

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

155

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

exclusive manner. The basic idea behind this option is to spur innovation by making the material available
for research and development for a greater scientiﬁc and perhaps also commercial audience than those
with the ﬁnancial resources to bioprospect in the high seas. Such a common pool collection model for
samples from the high seas would entail a continuum of marine resources being open to all. Without such a
common pool, collected biological material would often be held in private collections. Third party or
public access would constitute a type of beneﬁt sharing and thus meet the fairness criterion. This solution
corresponds to the needs of the scientiﬁc community and users without the ﬁnancial muscles to go on
cruises in the high seas (Greiber, 2011, p. 36). Therefore, it holds promise to promote innovation amongst
a greater grouping of inventors. The objective of ex situ conservation of marine resources will be fully met
for this proposal.

For this common pool beneﬁt-sharing option, the relevant trigger point could be the activity of
collecting samples, or at a later stage when the material has been processed or subject to research. It is
possible also to imagine later triggers, but if the beneﬁt sharing requires samples-deposit, the same
negative aspects as for monetary sharing do not appear.

A common pool of genetic resources raises several challenges both regarding the pool and the
commonness of the resources. Five legal and practical issues have been identiﬁed as important to the
management of collections (Tvedt and Schei, 2009): deﬁning the material or information included in the
pool; regulate the legal position of the depositor; the management of the pool itself; the legal position of
the user of material taken out of the pool and ﬁnally questions regarding ownership of the collection itself.
These issues all need to be discussed if any such pool is to be a realistic option.

A common pool can contain either biological samples or information about such samples. If a
common pool is to consist of samples, bioprospectors can be asked to deposit duplicate samples. These can
be samples at different stages of being processed: from living samples in an aquarium-style collection to
highly prepared laboratory samples of biological material. An aquarium would be the best option from a
conservation perspective as species threatened by extinction could be saved ex situ. This would also be the
most challenging option for the collectors, as keeping the specimen alive would require a lot of the
collection itself and of on-board storage facilities until the specimen can be deposited. There are practical
challenges to ex situ live collections too, as not all species can reproduce viable populations in captivity. It
would therefore be worth exploring alternative methods of preparing and storing the samples at a later
stage.

A common pool can be composed of information of any kind, such as in silico31 processed data;
sequencing data relating to the biological material; or research-derived knowledge. One option requiring a
minimum of management could be achieved by way of a clearing-house mechanism, where information
on the activity rather than the content of the ﬁndings is shared. Available sequencing data as a form of
beneﬁt sharing may disseminate knowledge fairly and irrespectively of where the recipients are located,
and would be based on well-known methods. The advantages in terms of conserving biodiversity could,
however, be more indirect than in the case indicated above concerning the depositing of material. In patent
terms, any collection of samples or information databank can be used as prior art and hinder novelty or
inventiveness. Therefore, how material or information is made available to the public through such a
deposit system need to be ﬁnetuned with respect to any later patent applications concerning invention
based thereon.

The second area in need of clariﬁcation concerns the conditions under which material is brought into
the pool. The politically most challenging option would be to make it mandatory to share samples with the
collections, as this would require global consensus amongst countries. A voluntary option would not put
the same strain on researchers and industry, but would nevertheless require positive incentives to
encourage sharing, for instance by allowing favourable access to the other accessions in the pool, or even
beneﬁts from discoveries or inventions that result from a deposit. A voluntary mechanism could also invite

156

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

parties to deposit material held in private collections and from others in addition to research vessels, such
as mining operators or offshore drilling companies when they ﬁnd or take out biological samples. By
including material from sources other than bioprospecting, activities with potentially damaging
environmental repercussions32 could be contributing to the ex situ conservation of some of the biodiversity
they put at risk.

All cases raise a fundamental question regarding the relationship between the collection and the
depositing party. This relationship is particularily relevant if the depositor shall seek patent protection, as
sharing might be postponed until after the patent application has been ﬁled. This can imply a considerably
delay, as time might be needed before a patentable invention is ready. There are three main alternatives:
samples are held in trust on behalf of the depositor; samples are given without restriction and samples are
pooled under certain speciﬁc conditions. In the former case, where the sample is held in trust, the
collection holds the material, but its disposal must be cleared with the depositor. The depositor maintains
full rights to the material as nothing is yet shared, but the material will be conserved ex situ. This option
would, however, not spur innovation by others, but could provide conservation and to a greater extent take
into consideration the needs of the depositor. On the other side of this scale, the depositor leaves the
material to the common pool, but retains no rights to it. In this situation, the depositor retains the right to
the sample that he keeps, but makes the duplicate sample openly available to the global commons, with
sharing set at maximum. This option would meet the conservation criterion, spur innovation and promote
sustainable use. In the intermediate situation, the material could be pooled under any type of contractual
restriction from the depositor. In these cases, different formulas for setting conditions securing the
incentive to innovate by the depositor are conceivable. One could be to prohibit sharing of the samples in
the collection before a certain date or before the depositor has granted permission.

Any middleground option leaves ﬂexibility to adjust the legal situation for individual bioprospectors
in contracts. This is particularly relevant if the depositor is intending to apply for a patent to the material or
an invention based on it. Should the depositor seek a patent, the conditions attached to the sample in
question would need to sustain the maintenance of novelty and inventiveness criteria by keeping the
sample undisclosed for the necessary time.33

This is closely related to the question of when material or information shall be shared with the collection.
The main alternatives would be immediately following the collecting activity, or at any subsequent point of
time in the process. If the system is mandatory, the trigger point needs to be speciﬁed; if the system were
voluntary, there would be no formal need to specify the point of time beforehand. For a voluntary system,
leaving ﬂexibility in a middleground contractual solution seems most viable in order not to deter innovation.
The third issue that would have to be addressed in the case of both sample deposits and sequencing
deposit solutions is the further management of the collections. Here, principles of sound management
could be drawn from the practices of other collections.

It will be imperative to deﬁne the conditions on which others can remove the material in the collection
for use. This is crucial of course because the whole idea of the system is to make accessions available to a
larger audience of users. Conditions for use would need to be elaborated in some detail, and this could also
be done by studying the standard agreements used by other collections. The rights of others to apply for
patent protection must be speciﬁed. Other users need to know the conditions on which they invest in
research on these samples. Ideally, these rules need to be made clearer than is the case for the rules
regulating the relationship to patent law in the Standard Material Transfer Agreement (SMTA) of the
ITPGRFA (Medaglia et al., 2013, pp. 43–7). Finally, questions of ownership to the collections as such and
coverage of their maintenance cost, will need to be resolved before any collection can embark on the task
of becoming the ex situ common pool of MGRs and information from ABNJ.

From a practical point of view, the institutional set-up needs to include public access collections. This
is a method known from the plant sector where the International Agricultural Research Centres (IARCs) of

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

157

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) collect and hold raw materials
and plant genetic resources. These collections are crucial for the conservation of plant genetic resources,34
and have played an important role in spurring innovation during the Green Revolution in the plant sector
(Dano, 2007, pp. 3–6). Transferring this option to marine bioprospecting purposes could promote ex situ
conservation of biodiversity.35 For material deposits to reach the intended objective of fairness, a
decentralized deposit system may be more efﬁcient than a centralized option. An alternative to building
collections from scratch would be to designate existing collections or research centres as repositories for
these samples. Again, the functioning of CGIAR centres can serve as an example. In these institutional set-
ups, the ex situ common pool is associated with capacity building initiatives and plant breeding for new
varieties, if the collections are combined with research units.

Summing up, we believe that a common pool model holds greater promise to spur innovation than the
fund model. Clearly, a system for ex situ conservation will generate more sustainable use and indeed
conserve the resources. Whether a common pool model is more apt than a fund to promote fairness
depends on how the both of them are construed.

Institutional Options
Traditionally, the concept of ABS belongs to the realm of areas under national jurisdiction.36 Merging this
concept with the regime of the high seas requires ﬁnding an apt institutional anchorage. This is a challenge
that will have to be addressed by stakeholders advocating a change to the status quo. In this section, we
examine some of the institutional alternatives that arise.

No agency currently has a mandate that would allow imposing mandatory bioprospecting regulation
for ABNJ. Whereas resources under national jurisdiction may be accessed through a contract or a bilateral
agreement, access to biological material in the ABNJ is not subject to any contractual counterpart. Beneﬁt-
sharing arrangements outside a system of international policies would have to take the form of self-
imposed obligations through ﬂag state jurisdiction. Ships are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
state under whose ﬂag they sail.37 Thus, when the minimum requirements of the law of the sea are met,
states are free to regulate the conditions of access to biological material for their nationals. One possible
option could be to make bioprospecting performed by nationals dependent on permits, the terms of which
could require bioprospectors to share beneﬁts. This would mean that undertaking obligations would be
voluntary in international law.

From a state perspective, there are important political disincentives to enacting such domestic
regulation. Principally, states have little, if any, incentive to place economic or practical burdens on their
nationals when other states do not, as this would place national research institutions or industry in a
position of competitive disadvantage in the international market. Furthermore, were states to enact such
regulations, it could create a problem of ﬂag-state shopping, at least for the private institutions conducting
bioprospecting: private institutions would have an incentive to relocate to states without such measures
and sail under the ﬂag of that state.38 The challenge to such an approach is even greater if no other states, or
only a few, were to enact legislation: the burden of being a Good Samaritan is even heavier to carry alone.
No such domestic legislation is known to have been enacted (Leary, 2009, p. 363).

An initial step would be to agree upon the aptness of a multilateral approach. For such multilateral
approaches, it could be fruitful to envisage the resources as common pool resources, possibly with
attached obligations (Tvedt, 2013). Some form of institutional entity or agency would be required to be in
charge of, or associated with, a multilateral approach. The question is what sort of entity.

A possible institutional avenue is that of a regional approach to high seas ABS. Regional agreements
that also cover ocean ABNJ are important in safeguarding the environment and biodiversity beyond the
Exclusive Economic Zone.39 Regional ﬁsheries management organizations or frameworks like the

158

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

OSPAR Convention40 may serve as examples. Regional agreements present certain characteristics that
should be noted here. First of all, vast parts of the high seas are not covered by regional agreements.
Placing ABS obligations on speciﬁc regions may discourage bioprospecting in those areas and thus not
spur innovation. Second, it could also increase bioprospecting pressure on the areas with the least
developed management systems, as access would probably be less regulated. And ﬁnally, there is less
justiﬁcation for monetary ABS as a means for achieving fairness in a regional context than in a global one,
as national wealth is often more evenly distributed amongst parties to a regional agreement than they are at
the global level. However, if ABS is seen as non-monetary and the beneﬁts shared are scientiﬁc
information or easier access to the knowledge that bioprospecting leads to, regional forums present with
the advantages of existing structures and experience that can be beneﬁcial to conservation and sustainable
use, provided regional organizations are strengthened and a functioning distribution of scientiﬁc
knowledge can be set up.

Another regulatory option could be for an international organization with responsibility for the end
product to have a stake, for example, marine bioprospecting with a view to creating a pharmaceutical
product could be regulated by the World Health Organization; food or agriculture could be regulated by
the Food and Agriculture Organization. Such a sector-based approach, assessed from the perspective of
the user, would have certain drawbacks. The sector within which an invention ﬁnds its use can be arbitrary
and overlap others. Legal obligations will not be known until a later stage of the bioprospecting process.
As predictability is an important factor for investing in bioprospecting, a sectoral approach could induce
disincentives to innovate in areas where there is a sector-speciﬁc organization hoping to receive the
beneﬁts. The distribution of these disincentives is also likely to be uneven. For instance, if an active
compound is identiﬁed and a commercial application is found in a sector with beneﬁt-sharing obligations,
it could be tempting not to invest further in product development in that sector. In this scenario, it would be
better for the industry to explore whether the compound might not have an application in another sector
that is not regulated by beneﬁt-sharing obligations. This argument would not be valid if ABS was seen by
the industry as positively business-friendly, or if all sectors were regulated. Both scenarios currently seem
rather unlikely in their fullest extent. Other difﬁcult questions would arise, such as what should be
considered a sector, whether all sectors should be regulated, and whether it is rational to entrust a number
of institutions with similar work. To sum up, a sectoral solution may prove contrary to the objective of
spurring innovation. Nor is a sectoral approach on the table in the on-going discussions.

Another possible institutional haven for ABS policies on biological material in the high seas could be
that of the CBD. It would involve entrusting some sort of institutional body, existing or to be created, with
a role in connection with a COP decision under the CBD, an MOP decision under the NP, guidelines, or a
new protocol.41 With a view to conserving biodiversity and promoting sustainable use, this institutional
option has certain advantages. Conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in ABNJ are recognized
objectives under the Convention: contracting parties have a general obligation to cooperate “in respect of
areas beyond national jurisdiction” for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.42 Since 1992,
the bodies of the CBD have grown increasingly proﬁcient in this area. Beneﬁt sharing could also build on
ideas set forth in NP article 10 on a possible multilateral beneﬁt-sharing mechanism for utilization of
genetic resources in “transboundary situations” and situations where “it is not possible to grant or obtain
prior informed consent”. Here, parties to the Protocol could conceivably negotiate a global multilateral
beneﬁt-sharing mechanism that addresses high seas genetic material. That said, any agreement reached in
this forum would in all likelihood be without the participation of the biggest biotech state, the United
States.43 The United States is also not party to UNCLOS, which decreases the relative value of this
argument. Of greater importance is the lack of institutional roots in the CBD for high seas governance that
go beyond the general principle of cooperation found in article 5 and the possibilities awarded by ﬂag state
jurisdiction through article 4. Legally, nothing stands in the way of taking the CBD as a starting point for

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

159

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

high seas ABS as long as the policies are in conformity with the law of the sea.44 All the same, it might be
perceived as presenting logical, or almost methodological, impediments. It may contradict the perception
of UNCLOS as “the legal framework within which all activities in the ocean and seas must be carried
out”.45 As noted by Greiber, joining a CBD-based global beneﬁt-sharing mechanism could be interpreted
as forum choice, and subsequently disconnect UNCLOS from ABS related to MGRs in ABNJ
(Greiber, 2011, p. 34). This latter point could be detrimental to the potential and role of UNCLOS to
protect the marine environment from all harmful human activity, and thus run counter to the objective of
conservation and sustainable use.

It might be more fruitful to apply the CBD concept of beneﬁt sharing to the “Constitution for the
oceans” and an UNCLOS framework. An institutional path starting from an UNCLOS offset could ensure
greater uniformity and integration with existing rights and obligations. It could also prove beneﬁcial to
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity if synergy effects are attained from future purely
environmental regulation of the high seas, such as marine protected areas. There is also a potential for
synergies between future UNCLOS-related regulation and the global multilateral beneﬁt-sharing
mechanism envisaged in NP article 10. The provision has a wider scope of application than the high seas; it
refers to utilization in “transboundary situations” and where “it is not possible to grant or to obtain prior
informed consent”. The idea behind NP article 10 was to bring genetic resources outside the scope of
national sovereignty, sometimes referred to as “orphan genetic resources”, under an ABS scheme
(Tvedt, 2011, p. 15). The idea of closing access gaps or vesting a body with the competence to regulate a
future mechanism under article 10 would have consequences for the question of sharing the beneﬁts from
bioprospecting in ABNJ.

As stated above, the views expressed by delegates to the Ad hoc Open-Ended Working Group, and

echoed at the Rio þ 20 summit, on the possibility of a new implementing agreement to UNCLOS has
given new momentum to the question of oceanic governance.46An implementing agreement to UNCLOS
holds great promise, such as the potential to take into account the inadequacies of the current law of the sea
and adopt holistic and modern environmental governance of the high seas. Concerning bioprospecting, the
potential is twofold: ﬁrstly, it would be an opportunity to address the problems encountered by deep sea
bioprospecting activities, as to the legal status of biological material of the Area.47 This legal clarity could
in turn encourage research and innovation. Secondly, a new implementing agreement could provide an
opportunity to render more effective what can be seen as existing beneﬁt-sharing provisions under
UNCLOS, such as technology transfer obligations.48 It could become a means of promoting fairness in the
exploitation of high seas biological material. It should be noted that an ABS regime, resembling that of
the CBD, is a potential, though far from self-evident, ingredient in such an implementing agreement. The
diversity of oceanic life faces a variety of great and imminent threats. A possible scenario is that even its
most ardent proponents would drop the controversial issue of beneﬁt sharing in order to solve other issues,
considered to be more urgent. These are considerations that are closely related to the discussions on
modalities of ABS options. In the context of an UNCLOS-associated process, the structure and size of an
ABS entity would depend on how states perceive beneﬁt sharing. If beneﬁt sharing is viewed as the
exchange of scientiﬁc knowledge, thus providing one form of fairness, a secretariat with the responsibility
for administering an Internet platform may sufﬁce.49 The current online bioprospecting information
resource maintained by the United Nations University may serve as an example here.50 A modest
institutional option could also be a clearing-house mechanism that receives notiﬁcation of scientiﬁc
research and ensures the further distribution of data (Matz-Lu¨ck, 2010, p. 69). If an ABS-system
resembling that outlined in NP article 10 were envisaged, a larger structure could be required. As pointed
out by Matz-Lu¨ck, full resource management, including scientiﬁc experts, compliance control and
decision-making bodies, would require a permanent institution, and the question of legal personality
would also have to be addressed (Matz-Lu¨ck, 2010, p. 68).

160

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

A candidate for the position of institutional umbrella for ABNJ ABS exists already within UNCLOS.
The International Seabed Authority (ISA), located in Jamaica, is in charge of administering the mineral
resources of the Area in accordance with principles set forth in Part XI. The legal status of seabed mineral
resources as common heritage of mankind and the provisions on technology transfer can be seen as
founded on objectives that reﬂect the “fairness” sought by ABS proponents. Additionally, the fact that the
ISA is an already existing institution is an important argument for the ISA assuming the role of managing a
future ABS regime for the high seas. It is most commonly evoked in relation to an expansion of its
mandate to include the biological resources of the Area. But
it could also be associated with
bioprospecting in the water column above. As noted in an EU working paper, the ISA may also be put in
charge of managing a sui generis system, thus avoiding fragmentation of international agencies, while
beneﬁting from existing structures and expertise and increasing the activities of an underused body.51
Politically, however, this scenario may prove exceedingly hard to realise, given the difﬁculties that arose
relating to the resources of the Area when UNCLOS was adopted. Another alternative for ABS proponents
would be to advocate for the creation of a separate institution with less ideologically controversial
baggage. Whether this strategy is fair, is another question. Developing countries can argue that history so
far has cheated them of the fervently fought for beneﬁts of the common heritage regime, as mineral
prospecting has yet to prove commercially lucrative.52 Amending or interpreting the regime of the Area to
apply to biological material on the ocean ﬂoor, seabed and the water column above could in that regard be
a fair redress of fate’s irony. Nevertheless, this scenario remains politically difﬁcult and could inhibit
progress on the issue.

A less controversial platform for high seas ABS could also be created in the future. Two ideas for
global institutions could be explored: the one of creating a World Environmental Organisation (WEO) or
the empowerment of a global genetic resource ombudsman. The idea of a WEO was launched before

Rio þ 20, but did not become a reality there. Yet increased interest in global marine governance could

perhaps be one of the developments that could make this institutional change regain global interest.

The idea of a genetic resource ombudsman has been tabled on a couple of occasions at ABS
negotiations under the CBD. The idea here is to create an independent advisory and surveillance system to
monitor potential breaches of ABS obligations. If no agreement can be reached to establish an authority in
connection with the UNCLOS, the ombudsman system would be worth exploring in greater detail.

The task of ﬁnding the appropriate forum cannot be evaded. Whether the entity is built upon the CBD,
UNCLOS or other instruments, its characteristics will as showed above depend on the rights and
obligations proposed.

Concluding Remarks

It is far from easy either from a technical legal perspective or in terms of what is politically feasible to set
up a regulatory environment for bioprospecting in the high seas. With a view to encouraging scientiﬁc
research and innovation, a fund or a state-to-state approach with mandatory monetary beneﬁt sharing can
provide disincentives to innovate.

If no distinction is made between academic and commercial research, and obligations fall on both
from the sampling moment, it could represent a step away from the current regime for scientiﬁc research as
a freedom of the high seas under UNCLOS.53 The compatibility of new regulations with the existing
framework would depend on what obligation actually is placed on the bioprospectors.

The negotiations leading to the ITPGRFA and the NP show how sensitive the trigger point issue is. It
is also probably the most crucial issue to resolve for an ABS system to become functional. Neither the
deﬁnitions in NP article 2(c), nor the solutions in the ITPGRFA, are particularly well drafted if the
objective is to establish legal basis for creating large revenues. If a system is meant to be mandatory, the

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

161

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

formulation of the trigger points is crucial because they must be made legally binding in national law to
create obligations on the users. Noting the recent EU proposal for user country measures to meet NP
obligations54 and the non-membership to the CBD of the United States as a core biotech economy, there
will likely be substantial political difﬁculties connected to speciﬁc mandatory trigger points also regarding
marine bioprospecting.

Building on UNCLOS policy of making research available would be less threatening to the
safeguarding of innovation. The idea of a common pool means strengthening UNCLOS objectives of
disseminating research and technology. It too has drawbacks in limiting the exclusivity otherwise offered
to bioprospectors, though the exclusivity offered by a patent would still be intact. Ironically, though, most
of the challenges to innovation indicated above under this option come from patent law, which has as its
primary justiﬁcation the protection of investments and the promotion of innovation.

Compared to the monetary transfer scenario discussed above, this option has important advantages
for the promotion of scientiﬁc innovation. It also provides a way of rendering operable the technology-
transfer provisions of UNCLOS, and thus meet the objectives of the negotiators of the “Constitution for
the oceans”. Rendering what are initially in situ common pool resources de facto common pool resources
in the wild, irrespective of economic capacities, could provide fairness and spur innovation.

About the Authors
Morten Walløe Tvedt, senior research fellow, Fridtjof Nansen Institute, P.O. Box 326, 1326 Lysaker,
Norway; e-mail: mwt@fni.no. Tvedt has published extensively in the area of genetic resource law and
intellectual property in recent years (see www.fni.no for a complete list of publications). The
most important monograph regarding genetic resources he co-authored with Tomme R. Young, Beyond
Access: Exploring Implementation of the Fair and Equitable Sharing Commitment in the CBD. IUCN
Environmental Policy and Law Paper No. 67/1 (available in English, Spanish and French, www.fni.no/
publ/biodiversity.html).

Ane E. Jørem, research fellow, Fridtjof Nansen Institute, P.O. Box 326, 1326 Lysaker, Norway;
e-mail: aej@fni.no. Her research interests lie in the ﬁeld of legal regulation of biological diversity and
marine genetic resources. The research behind this article is funded by the Norwegian Research Council
under the ELSA Program and forms part of the 3 year project “Exploring Legal Conditions and
Framework for Marine-based Bioprospecting and Innovation” at the FNI.

Notes

1. United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1833 UNTS 3, adopted on 10 December 1982.
2. Convention on Biological Diversity, 1760 UNTS 79, adopted on 5 June 1992, article 15.
3. Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Beneﬁts Arising from

their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity, adopted on 29 October 2010.

4. The Area is the “sea-bed and the ocean ﬂoor and the subsoil thereof beyond national jurisdiction”. UNCLOS,

article 1(1).

5. See for example, Glowka (1996, pp. 154–78), Oude Elferink (2007), Matz-Lu¨ck (2010) and Scovazzi (2010).
6. Established by resolution of the United Nations General Assembly, Oceans and the Law of the Sea (A/RES/59/24,

2004).

7. Ibid., paragraph 73(d).
8. See for example, Ad Hoc Open-Ended Informal Working Group, Letter dated 15 May 2008 from the Co-
Chairpersons of the Ad-Hoc Open-Ended Informal Working Group to Study Issues Relating to the Conservation

162

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

of Marine Biological Diversity in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction to the President of the General Assembly
(A/63/79), paragraphs 6 and 10.

9. Ad Hoc Open-Ended Informal Working Group, Letter Dated 8 June 2012 from the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Open-

ended Informal Working Group to the President of the General Assembly (A/67/95, 2012), paragraphs 15–9.

10. International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, 2400 UNTS 303, adopted on 3

November 2001.

11. Ad Hoc Open-Ended Informal Working Group, Letter dated 15 May 2008 from the Co-Chairpersons of the Ad-
Hoc Open-Ended Informal Working Group to Study Issues Relating to the Conservation of Marine Biological
Diversity in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction to the President of the General Assembly (A/63/79), paragraph 38.
12. UNCSD, Report of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (A/CONF.216/16, 2012),

paragraph 162.

13. Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group, Letter Dated 30 June 2011 from the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Informal Working Group to the President of the General Assembly (A/66/119, 2011), paragraph 6.

14. On the effects of the economic downturn for biotechnology, see Giovannetti and Jaggi (2012, pp. 25–39).
15. CBD, article 2, paragraph 13.
16. Ibid., article 2, paragraph 8.
17. Its provisions apply in relation to each contracting party to areas within national jurisdiction and may only be

extended to ABNJ as a result of ﬂag state jurisdiction. See ibid., article 4(a) and (b).

18. See World Commission on Environment and Development, Report of the World Commission on Environment

and Development: Our Common Future (Annex to document A/42/427, 1987), part IV, paragraph 1.

19. Ibid. See Sands (2003, p. 253).
20. See UNCLOS, preamble, paragraph 5. On the justice in using genetic resources, see Schroeder and Pogge

(2009).

21. See COP4, Adressing the Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Beneﬁts Arising out of Genetic Resources: Options
for Assistance to Developing Country Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP/CBD/COP4/22,
1998), p. 3. This link has been contested, see Simpson (1997).

22. For a discussion of these challenges, see Tvedt and Young (2007, pp. 59–96).
23. Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Access and Beneﬁt-sharing, Report of the Meeting of the Group of Legal
and Technical Experts on Concepts, Terms, Working Deﬁntions and Sectoral Approaches (UNEP/CBD/WG-
ABS/7/2, 2–9 April 2009).

24. See for example, Smagadi (2009, p. 29).
25. This thought draws inspiration from Young and Tvedt (2009, p. 24).
26. See generally Hoare and Tarasofsky (2007); Tvedt (2006, p. 204).
27. On the development of the open source movement, see for example, Mandrusiak (2010, pp. 313–6).
28. See for example, Kamau and Winter (2013).
29. See NP, annex, article 1(2).
30. See for example, Broggiato (2011, p. 36); also Leary (2009, p. 362). Both put particular emphasis on sampling in

the deep seas of areas beyond national jurisdiction.

31. That is “describing biological processes or experiments that are simulated by a computer program”, Oxford

University Press (2012).

32. On the environmental impacts of seabed mining and fossil fuel extraction compared to bioprospecting, see

Ramirez-Llodra et al. (2011, pp. 11–5).

33. Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, adopted on 15 April 1994, article 27(1).
There are different understandings of the “novelty” requirement, ranging from an absolute novelty requirement to
a local novelty requirement, see Grubb (1999, pp. 54–8).

34. On the history and functioning of the CGIAR, see Fowler and Mooney (1990, pp. 150–1); FAO (FAO, 1997,

p. 253); Louaﬁ (2013).

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

163

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

35. Potentially, but controversially, it could be used as a means reintroduce endangered species into the wild. Given
the vastness of the ocean, how useful such reintroduction is would have to be evaluated along with the
considerations of ecological impacts of reintroduction in general.

36. See CBD, article 15, which establishes that the authority to determine access to GR rests with national
governments and is subject to their legislation, while obliging states to take measures to share beneﬁts arising
from the commercial utilisation of these GR. See also article 4 concerning the jurisdictional scope of the
convention.

37. UNCLOS, article 92(1).
38. Pursuant to UNCLOS article 91 there must nonetheless be a “genuine link between the State and the ship”.
39. For an introduction to the most important regional treaties and their importance in protecting marine ecosystems,

see Warner (2009, pp. 173–205).

40. Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic, 2354 UNTS 67, adopted on

22 September 1992.

41. See Greiber (2011, p. 34). He argues against CBD-associated organs hosting a global multilateral beneﬁt-sharing

mechanism.

42. CBD, article 5.
43. The United States signed the CBD in 1993, but never ratiﬁed it. UNCLOS and the Implementation Agreement
Relating to Part XI were sent to the American Senate in 1994, where ratiﬁcation was rejected. For the comparative
dominance of the United States in biotechnology, see Giovannetti et al. (2011).

44. CBD, article 22(2) provides that parties shall implement the convention “with respect to the marine environment

consistently with […] the law of the sea”.

45. United Nations General Assembly, Oceans and the Law of the Sea (A/RES/66/77, 2011), preamble, paragraph 4.
46. See generally Hart (2008). See also Chiarolla et al. (2012).
47. On the long-standing, unresolved paradoxes of the legal status of MGR in the Area in relation to the
Common Heritage of Mankind, see Glowka (1996, pp. 154–78), Leary (2007), Oude Elferink (2007), Leary
(2012, pp. 435–48).

48. UNCLOS, Part XIV. This part of the Convention is considered by some parties to be the Part with the gravest
implementation gaps. See Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group, Letter Dated 30 June 2011 from the Co-
Chairs of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to the President of the General Assembly (A/66/119,
2011), paragraph 36.

49. See Matz-Lu¨ck (2010, p. 68). Her institutional proposals concern management of the living resources in the Area.
50. United Nations University (2012). The database publishes known information on research and commercialised
products arising from bioprospecting in the four categories of Antarctic, Paciﬁc, Marine and Arctic
bioprospecting.

51. Council of the European Union, Reﬂections on the Management of Genetic Resources in Areas Beyond National
Jurisdiction (Background paper 12) (11510/06 ADD 12, 2006), p. 9. See also Matz-Lu¨ck (2010, pp. 72–3), who
favours this option for biological resources in the Area, but recognises its unlikelihood.

52. De la Fayette considers that if delegates negotiating UNCLOS had known about the economic potential of genetic
resources when the Convention was negotiated, surely they would have included them in Part XI. De la Fayette
(2010, p. 77).

53. UNCLOS, Part XIII.
54. The European Commission, Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Access to Genetic
Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Beneﬁts Arising from their Utilization in the Union (COM
(2012) 567 Final, 2012).

164

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

References

Broggiato, A. (2008) ‘Marine Biological Diversity in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction’, Environmental Law and

Policy, 38(4), 182–8.

Broggiato, A. (2011) ‘Marine Genetic Resources Beyond National Jurisdiction—Coordination and Harmonisation of

Governance Regimes’, Environmental Policy and Law, 41(1), 35–42.

Chiarolla, C., Kantai, T. and Morgera, E. (2012) Summary of the Fifth Meeting of the Working Group on Marine
Biodiversity Beyond Areas of National Jurisdiction. Earth Negociations Bulletin, 25(83), International Institute
for Sustainable Development, 14 May 2012, n.p. Available at <http://www.iisd.ca/vol25/enb2583e.html>
[Accessed 19 December 2012].

Dano, E.C. (2007) Unmasking the New Green Revolution in Africa: Motives, Players and Dynamics. Third World

Network, Penang.

De la Fayette, L.A. (2010) ‘Institutional Arrangements for the Legal Regime Governing Areas Beyond National
Jurisdiction—Commentary on Tullio Scovazzi’, in Molenaar E. J. and Oude Elferink A. G. (eds.), The
International Legal Regime of Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction: Current and Future Developments. Martinus
Nijhoff, Leiden, pp. 61–75.

Drankier, P., Oude Elferink, A.G., Visser, B. and Taka´cs, T. (2012) ‘Marine Genetic Resources in Areas Beyond
National Jurisdiction: Access and Beneﬁt-Sharing’, The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law,
27(2), 375–433.

FAO. (1997) The State of the World’s Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. FAO, Rome.
Fowler, C. and Mooney, P. (1990) Shattering: Food, Policies and the Loss of Genetic Diversity. University of Arizona

Press, Tucson.

Giovannetti, G. and Jaggi, G. (2012) Beyond Borders: Global Biotechnology Report 2012. Ernst & Young,
n.p. Available at <http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Beyond_borders_2012/$FILE/Beyond_borders_
2012.pdf> [Accessed 19 December 2012].

Giovannetti, G., Jaggi, G. and Bialojan, S. (2011) Beyond Borders: Global Biotechnology Report 2011. Ernst &
Young, n.p. Available at <http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Beyond_borders_global_biotechnology_
report_2011/$FILE/Beyond_borders_global_biotechnology_report_2011.pdf> [Accessed 19 December 2012].

Glowka, L. (1996) ‘The Deepest of Ironies: Genetic Resources, Marine Scientiﬁc Research, and the Area’, Ocean

Yearbook, 12, 154–78.

Greiber, T. (2011) Access and Beneﬁt Sharing in Relation to Marine Genetic Resources From Areas Beyond National

Jurisdiction: A Possible Way Foreward, BfN-Skripten No. 301, IUCN, Bonn.

Grubb, P.W. (1999) Patents for Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology: Fundamentals of Global Law,

Practice and Strategy. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Hart, S. (2008) Elements of a Possible Implementation Agreement to UNCLOS for the Conservation and Sustainable

Use of Marine Biodiversity in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction, Marine Series No. 4, IUCN, Gland.

Hoare, A.L. and Tarasofsky, R.G. (2007) ‘Asking and Telling: Can ‘Disclosure of Origin’ Requirements in Patent

Applications Make a Difference?’, , 10(2), 149–69.

Kamau, E.C. and Winter, G. (eds.), (2013) Common Pools of Genetic Resources: Equity and Innovation in

International Biodiversity Law. Routledge, London.

Leary, D. (2007) International Law and the Genetic Resources of the Deep Sea. Martinus Nijhoff, Leiden.
Leary, D. (2009) ‘International Law and the Genetic Resources of the Deep Sea’, in Vidas D. (ed.), Law, Technology
and Science for Oceans in Globalisation: IUU Fishing, Oil Pollution, Bioprospecting, Outer Continental Shelf.
Martinus Nijhoff, Leiden, pp. 353–69.

Leary, D. (2012) ‘Moving the Marine Genetic Resources Debate Forward: Some Ref‘lections’, The International

Journal of Marine and Coastal Law, 27, 435–448.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

165

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Louaﬁ, S. (2013) ‘Collective Action Challenges in the Implementation of the Multilateral System of the International
Treaty: What Roles for the CGIAR Centres?’, in Halewood, M. Noriega I.L. and Louaﬁ S. (eds.), Crop Plant
Genetic Resources As a Global Commons: Challenges in International Law and Governance. Earthscan,
Abington, pp. 310–28 [forthcoming].

Mandrusiak, L. (2010) ‘Balancing Open Source Paradigms and Traditional Intellectual Property Models to Optimize

Innovation’, Maine Law Review, 63(1), 304–30.

Matz-Lu¨ck, N. (2010) ‘The Concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind’, in Molenaar, E.J. and Oude Elferink A.G.
(eds.), The International Legal Regime of Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction: Current and Future
Developments. Martinus Nijhoff, Leiden, pp. 61–75.

Medaglia, J.C., Morten, W.T., Frederic, P.-W., Ane, J. and Freedom-Kai, P. (2013) The Interface between the Nagoya
Protocol on ABS and the ITPGRFA at the International Level—Potential Issues for Consideration in Supporting
Mutually Supportive Implementation at the National Level. Fridtjof Nansens Institutt, Lysaker (FNI Report,
no. 1/2013).

Oude Elferink, A.G. (2007) ‘The Regime of the Area: Delineating the Scope of Application of the Common
Heritage Principle and Freedom of the High Seas’, The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law, 22(1),
143–75.

A Dictionary of Biology (2012) Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ramirez-Llodra, E., Tyler, P.A., Baker, M.C., Bergstad, O.A., Clark, M.A., Escobar, E., Levin, L.A., Menot, L.,
Rowden, A.A., Smith, C.R. and Van Dover, C.L. (2011) ‘Man and the Last Great Wilderness: Human Impact on
the Deep Sea.’ PLoS ONE, 6(7), 1–25.

Rawls, J. (1993) ‘The Law of the Peoples’, Critical Inquiry, 20(1), 36–68.
Rawls, J. (1999) A Theory of Justice: Revised Edition. Belknapp Press, Cambridge, MA.
Salpin, C. and Germani, V. (2007) ‘Patenting of Research Results Related to Genetic Resources from Areas Beyond
National Jurisdiction: The Crossroads of the Law of the Sea and Intellectual Property Law’, RECIEL, 16(1),
12–23.

Sands, P. (2003) Principles of International Environmental Law. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Schroeder, D. and Pogge, T. (2009) ‘Justice and the Convention on Biological Diversity’, Ethics and International

Affairs, 23(3), 267–280.

Scovazzi, T. (2010) ‘The Seabed Beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction: General and Institutional Aspects’, in
Oude Elferink A.G. and Molenaar E.J. (eds.), The International Legal Regime of Areas Beyond National
Jurisdiction: Current and Future Developments. Martinus Nijhoff, Leiden, pp. 43–60.

Simpson, R.D. (1997) ‘Biodiversity Prospecting: Shopping the Wild Is Not the Key to Conservation’, Resources, 126,

12–15.

Smagadi, A. (2009) Medicinal Bioprospecting: Policy Options for Access and Beneﬁt-Sharing. British Institute of

International and Comparative Law, London.

Treves, T.

(2010)

‘Principles and Objectives of

the Legal Regime Governing Areas Beyond National
Jurisdiction’,
in Oude Elferink, A.G. and Molenaar, E.J. (eds.), The International Legal Regime of
Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction: Current and Future Developments. Martinius Nijhoff, Leiden,
pp. 8–25.

Tvedt, M.W. (2006) ‘Elements for Legislation in User Countries to Meet the Fair and Equitable Beneﬁt-Sharing

Commitment’, The , 9(2), 189–212.

Tvedt, M.W. (2010) ‘Patent Law and Bioprospecting in Antarctica’, Polar Record, 47, 45–55.
Tvedt, M.W. (2011) A Report from the First Reﬂection Meeting on the Global Multilateral Beneﬁt-Sharing

Mechanism, FNI Report No. 10/2011, Fridtjof Nansen Institute, Lysaker (Norway).

Tvedt, M.W. (2013) ‘Common Pools in Aquaculture: Exploring Patent Law ABS and Sui Generis Options’, in Kamau

E.C. and Winter G. (eds.), Common Pools of Genetic Resources. Routledge, London [Forthcoming].

166

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

Bioprospecting in the High Seas

Morten Walle Tvedt and Ane E. Jrem

Tvedt, M.W. and Schei, P.J. (2009) Den rettslige situasjonen for MARBANK og andre marine biobanker i Norge, FNI

Report No. 6/2009, Fridtjof Nansen Institute, Lysaker (Norway).

Tvedt, M.W. and Young, T.R. (2007) Beyond Access: Exploring Implementation of the Fair and Equitable Sharing

Commitment in the CBD, IUCN Environmental Policy and Law Paper No. 67/2, IUCN, Gland.

United Nations University. Bioprospecting Information Resource [online database]. Available at <www.

bioprospector.org/bioprospector/> [Accessed 19 December 2012].

Warner, R. (2009) Protecting the Oceans Beyond National Jurisdiction: Strengthening the International Law

Framework. Martinus Nijhoff, Leiden.

Young, T. and Tvedt, M.W. (2009) Balancing Building Blocks of a Functional ABS System, FNI Report No. 7/2009,

Fridtjof Nansen Institute, Lysaker (Norway).

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2013) Vol. 16, no. 3–4

167


