The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2, pp. 2–27

doi: 10.1111/jwip.12051

International Coercion and the Diffusion of
Regulatory Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael
Information Society Project, Yale Law School

Prior to 1990, regulatory data protection existed only in 14 highly developed countries. Since then, 60 additional
countries have adopted regulatory data protection. New adopters include a large number of countries with no
domestic pharmaceutical industry. These countries will face higher pharmaceutical prices as a result of offering
regulatory data protection. Why would countries that stand to lose from offering regulatory data protection choose
to do so? The author argues that the global diffusion of regulatory data protection can be directly traced to
international coercion from the United States and the European Union (EU). The US coerces weaker trading
partners into adopting regulatory data protection by requiring such protection as a condition of concluding trade
agreements or bilateral intellectual property agreements. Meanwhile, the EU coerces applicants by demanding that
they adopt such rights during EU accession negotiations, on average four years prior to accession. He tested these
claims using a multi-method research design that combines event history analysis with evidence from leaked US
diplomatic cables and public EU accession documents. His ﬁndings demonstrate that coercive diffusion can take
place by means of threats, and that countries often actively oppose adopting intellectual property rights, but
nevertheless adopt them due to international coercion.

Keywords TRIPS; bilateralism; pharmaceuticals; intellectual property

Over the past two decades, scores of countries around the world have adopted new and unusual intellectual
property rights. Separate from the traditional areas of copyright, patent and trademark, new sui generis
rights protect exotic subject matter, such as databases, plant varieties or the layout of integrated circuits.
Often the countries adopting these new protections have no clear reason to do so. They have no domestic
industries that stand to beneﬁt from new protections, and domestic policymakers often oppose their
introduction. This is especially true of the intellectual property rights protecting the clinical trial data that
pharmaceutical ﬁrms submit to regulatory authorities (hereafter regulatory data protection). These data
document the safety and efﬁcacy of pharmaceutical products. Adopting intellectual property rights that
restrict access to these data allows pharmaceutical ﬁrms to delay competition from generic manufacturers,
increasing the price of medicine and further burdening public health systems throughout the world.

Prior to 1990, regulatory data protection existed only in 14 highly developed countries. Since then, 60
additional countries have adopted regulatory data protection. The large number of countries adopting this
new intellectual property right poses a puzzle. The new adopters include a large number of countries with
no domestic pharmaceutical industry whatsoever, and these countries will face higher pharmaceutical
prices as a result of offering regulatory data protection. Why would countries that stand to lose from
offering regulatory data protection choose to do so?

This article argues that the global diffusion of regulatory data protection can be directly traced to
international coercion from the United States and the European Union. Although regulatory data
protection increases pharmaceutical prices and harms public health, it beneﬁts large pharmaceutical ﬁrms
based in the United States and EU member states (El-Said and El-Said, 2007; Malpani, 2009; Shaffer and
Brenner, 2009). The United States coerces weaker trading partners into adopting regulatory data protection
by requiring such protection as a condition of concluding trade or bilateral intellectual property

2

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

agreements. Meanwhile, the EU coerces applicants by demanding that they adopt such rights during EU
accession negotiations, on average four years prior to accession.

I test these claims using a multi-method research design that combines event history analysis with
detailed evidence gleaned from leaked US diplomatic cables and public EU accession documents. The
statistical analysis ﬁnds strong correlations between the decision of a country to sign a trade agreement
with the United States or apply for EU membership and an increased likelihood of adopting regulatory data
protection. These correlations persist even when controlling for a number of key political and economic
variables. Furthermore, I ﬁnd no support for explanations of diffusion pointing to the role of international
organizations, learning or mimicry. Leaked diplomatic cables conﬁrm that countries negotiating trade
agreements with the United States actively opposed adopting regulatory data protection but ultimately
caved to US pressure. Likewise, EU accession documents indicate that newly acceding members sought to
delay adopting regulatory data protection as long as possible.

My ﬁndings have signiﬁcance for at least two literatures. First, my research demonstrates that coercive
diffusion can take place by means of threats. Powerful states can threaten to withhold or delay promised
beneﬁts or remove existing beneﬁts, unless a target state adopts a desired policy. This can happen in a
variety of negotiations, such as bilateral trade agreement negotiations, EU accession negotiations, and the
WTO accession process. Over the past few decades, international economic negotiations have experienced
a dramatic shift from the multilateral forum of the GATT/WTO to a plethora of regional, plurilateral and
bilateral agreements (Mansﬁeld and Pevehouse, 2013; Menon, 2007). Yet within the diffusion literature,
the focus has been on accounting for the diffusion of the agreements themselves, rather than asking
whether trade agreements and other rapidly proliferating types of agreements might serve as new conduits
for coercion.1

While the sanctions literature has come to view threats as a frequent and effective form of coercion in
the service of foreign policy goals, the diffusion literature largely focuses on other forms of coercion.2
These other forms of coercion include conditionality imposed by international ﬁnancial institutions and
federal governments; hierarchical coercion imposed by supranational or national governments on lower
governments; “soft coercion” in the form of go-it-alone power, ﬁrst-mover advantages or successful
policies serving as templates for second-comers; and constructivist forms of power exerted through
persuasion, hegemonic ideas or the ability of normative leaders to shape states’ behavior.3 Some scholars
go so far as to downplay the importance of coercion as a mechanism of diffusion, claiming that coercion is
“out of step with our world,” (Simmons et al., 2008, pp. 358–359). In contrast, my ﬁndings show that
powerful states possess the ability to dictate the terms of law and policy to weaker states by threatening to
withhold beneﬁts during various types of negotiations.

Second, the results show that when countries adopt new intellectual property rights like regulatory
data protection, they often do so for reasons other than those commonly suggested by the economic or
international political economy literature. The traditional economic justiﬁcation for creating intellectual
property rights points to the necessity of such rights to solve market failures that result from the non-rival
and -excludable nature of intangible goods (Landes and Posner, 2003). Countries may also adopt
intellectual property rights in order to beneﬁt from their presumed indirect effects, such as fostering
economic development, attracting foreign investment or sending signals about a business-friendly
environment (Braga et al., 2000; Fink and Maskus, 2005; Javorcik, 2004). In contrast to these economic
explanations, my ﬁndings show that countries often actively oppose adopting intellectual property rights,
but nevertheless adopt them due to international coercion. As a result, the so-called harmonization of
intellectual property law does not reﬂect a growing international consensus or the beneﬁts of
standardization, but rather the effects of coercion (Dutﬁeld and Suthersanen, 2005).

The remainder of the article proceeds as follows: ﬁrst, I explain what regulatory data protection is, and
how and why regulatory data came to be protected as intellectual property. I also discuss the negative

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

3

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

effects of regulatory data protection on pharmaceutical prices and public health. Second, I discuss theories
that might explain the puzzle of why so many countries have adopted regulatory data protection despite
having good reasons not to do so. Third, I present the results of an event history analysis of potential factors
contributing to the adoption of such protection. Finally, I offer detailed qualitative evidence conﬁrming the
causal processes suggested by the event history analysis: the United States and EU coerce weaker states
into adopting strict intellectual property laws through trade and accession agreements. The qualitative
evidence also largely eliminates competing explanations.

1 What is Regulatory Data Protection?
Before pharmaceutical ﬁrms can market new products, they must gain regulatory approval on the basis of
successful clinical trials. Over the years, these clinical trials have become increasingly expensive.
Estimates of the costs of trials vary widely, but the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of
America (PhRMA) reports total costs of over $1 billion to develop and bring to market a new drug
(PhRMA, 2012). Some research criticizes these estimates as inﬂated (Light and Warburton, 2011). Still, it
is clear that drug development entails large costs, of which clinical trials account for a signiﬁcant portion
(Adams and Brantner, 2006; DiMasi et al., 2003).

Clinical trials generate valuable data; these data are the evidence upon which regulators base their
decisions to approve new drugs. The data are valuable to more than just the original ﬁrm: if competing
ﬁrms can show that their products are equivalent to the original, they can save hundreds of millions of
dollars by foregoing their own clinical trials and relying on the data already submitted to regulators by the
original ﬁrm. Patent laws normally prohibit such behavior by forbidding competing ﬁrms from copying
patented drugs. But once its patents expire, competing ﬁrms are free to duplicate a drug. This is the
standard strategy used by generic pharmaceutical ﬁrms to bring competing versions of drugs to market.
Despite their economic value, regulatory data are largely unprotected by intellectual property law. As
scientiﬁc facts, data cannot be patented or copyrighted. As a result, in the 1980s, the governments of
countries that were home to major pharmaceutical ﬁrms developed a novel form of protection for
regulatory data. In 1984, as part of the Hatch–Waxman Act, the United States created a new intellectual
property right for regulatory data (Weiswasser and Danzis, 2003). The law stipulates that for a period of
ﬁve years after a pharmaceutical company submits data for regulatory approval, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) will not accept applications to approve competing products that rely on the data. In
1986, the EU adopted a similar regime, providing a minimum of six years of regulatory data protection.
Since generic pharmaceutical manufacturers operate on thin margins, they cannot affordably conduct
duplicate clinical trials. Thus, regulatory data protection effectively prevents generic competition for
several years.

As pharmaceutical ﬁrms increasingly focused on markets outside the United States and Western
Europe, regulatory data protection became increasingly important. Originator pharmaceutical ﬁrms—that
is, ﬁrms that undertake research and development of new drugs—normally seek to patent their products in
jurisdictions throughout the world. However, patentability requirements vary by country. The United
States has relatively weak standards of patentability, meaning that a pharmaceutical product patented in
the United States may not be eligible for a patent in another country. In contrast, regulatory data protection,
when available, obtains irrespective of patent status. Even if a patent is later invalidated or was never
sought, regulatory data protection provides a virtually unassailable monopoly for the original ﬁrm, making
it highly attractive for originator pharmaceutical ﬁrms.

In the absence of generic competition, originator ﬁrms can charge signiﬁcantly higher prices,
sometimes for many years. These price increases cut into ﬁnite public health budgets, leaving less money
to spend on treatment and covering fewer affected individuals (Baker, 2008; Malpani, 2009). As a result, a

4

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

Figure 1. Cumulative Adoptions of Regulatory Data Protection

country’s decision about whether or not to provide regulatory data protection can literally be a matter of
life and death (Cawthorne, 2012).

Figure 1 shows the cumulative number of countries that have adopted regulatory data protection over
time, whereas Figure 2 shows which countries currently offer such protection. Prior to 1990, regulatory
data protection was conﬁned to fourteen highly developed countries. Since then, sixty additional countries
have adopted laws offering this new intellectual property right.

The originator pharmaceutical industry is heavily concentrated in the United States and a few Western
European countries. The decision of these countries to create a new intellectual property right in regulatory
data are adequately explained by traditional collective action theory: a relatively small number of
pharmaceutical ﬁrms stand to gain concentrated beneﬁts, while the costs fall upon a diffuse and
unorganized consumer population (Drahos, 2004; Olson, 1971). But the vast majority of countries that
have adopted laws protecting regulatory data in the past two decades have no pharmaceutical industry
whatsoever. In such cases, there is no domestic constituency that can directly beneﬁt from this special
intellectual property right. Furthermore, these countries can expect to be negatively affected by the delayed
generic competition and increases in pharmaceutical prices associated with regulatory data protection.
Why would these countries choose to offer such protection? The next section presents several possible
explanations.

2 Mechanisms of Diffusion
Coercion
Countries without signiﬁcant originator pharmaceutical industries—that is, virtually every country outside
of the United States, the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Germany and France—have no obvious reason to
adopt new intellectual property rights protecting clinical trial data. This article contends that of the 74
countries that have adopted laws creating such rights, most have done so as a direct result of international
coercion exerted by the United States and the EU.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

5

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

Figure 2. Map of Countries Providing Regulatory Data Protection

Hypothesis 1 Countries negotiating a trade or bilateral intellectual property agreement with the United
States will be more likely to adopt laws protecting regulatory data, due primarily to US coercion.

Coercion “refers to a situation in which one actor (A) is able to manipulate the cost/beneﬁt ratios of the
alternatives perceived by another actor (B) so that the latter would be foolish to choose any alternative
other than X,” (Baldwin, 1985, p. 38). Coercion need not necessarily imply only harm or the threat of harm.
As Baldwin notes, it can also involve promised rewards, actual rewards or providing false information
about cost/beneﬁt ratios. Countries negotiating trade agreements are subject to coercion on various
matters, such as human rights standards and intellectual property policies Drahos et al. (2004) and Hafner-
Burton (2005). The United States in particular devotes signiﬁcant resources to achieving its ends with
respect to intellectual property policy. In addition to including extensive intellectual property chapters in
its trade agreements, the United States has established a number of bilateral intellectual property
agreements with various countries. These agreements are usually linked to bilateral investment treaties,
and the US portrays them as a stepping stone to stronger bilateral economic relations (Drahos, 2001). Most
US demands on intellectual property are non-negotiable, and stem from a US template for free trade
agreements that offers no ﬂexibility to potential trading partners (Lopert and Gleeson, 2013). While some
of this template simply restates the provisions contained in the World Trade Organization’s (WTO)
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), many of the template’s
demands are “TRIPS-plus,” requiring countries to provide more stringent protection than that required by
international law. Since the mid-1990s, this template has required parties to provide a TRIPS-plus form of
regulatory data protection. Given the potential for these agreements to serve as instruments of coercion, I

6

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

expect countries negotiating trade or bilateral intellectual property agreements with the United States to be
more likely to adopt laws protecting regulatory data.4

Hypothesis 2 Countries negotiating accession to the EU will be more likely to adopt laws protecting
regulatory data, due primarily to EU coercion.

Accession to the EU involves negotiations between parties of vastly unequal negotiating power
(PuSscaSs, 2014). While the Europeanization literature invokes the concept of conditionality, under which
the EU offers beneﬁts to prospective members in exchange for political and economic concessions from
prospective members, this kind of conditionality is practically and theoretically equivalent to coercion
(Cengiz and Hoffmann, 2013; Dobbin et al., 2007; Schimmelfennig and Sedelmeier, 2004). Countries
negotiating accession to the EU face the prospect of conforming their domestic law with the entire acquis
communautaire, which necessarily includes adopting current EU law on regulatory data protection.
However, because the EU observes and reports on prospective members’ accession progress, applicants
face pressure to conform to the acquis earlier than necessary. As a result, EU applicants that eventually join
the EU on average adopt regulatory data protection nearly four years before acceding. This unexpected
behavior is due to coercive pressure exerted by the EU during the accession process.

These hypotheses not only specify expected statistical correlations, but also identify coercion as the
mechanism that produces such correlations. A purely quantitative analysis cannot completely conﬁrm
them. Thus, I adopt a multi-method research design that combines both quantitative and qualitative
analysis to test these hypotheses.

Alternative Explanations
The existing literature posits a number of alternative explanations. Rather than pointing to coercion, these
explanations emphasize the constraints of international
the role of
international organizations and processes of socialization or mimicry.

law, economic competition,

International Law
International law encompasses numerous treaties relating to intellectual property. For more than a century,
the Berne and Paris Conventions have established minimum international standards for copyright and
patent law respectively. The WTO’s TRIPS incorporates provisions from both the Berne and Paris
Conventions, and imposes additional requirements on member states’ domestic intellectual property law
(Kapczynski, 2009; Reich, 2004). Thus, the steady expansion of WTO membership could offer a potential
explanation for the diffusion of regulatory data protection.

In theory, all WTO members are required to protect regulatory data from “unfair commercial use.” But
in practice, this provision is only valuable to pharmaceutical ﬁrms when it is implemented in the manner
the United States and the EU have chosen: providing ﬁve or more years of inviolable protection against any
use of regulatory data by competitors whatsoever. During this period, pharmaceutical ﬁrms possess an
unassailable monopoly regardless of patent status. While the United States tried to ensure that the WTO’s
Agreement on TRIPS included provisions similar to the 1984 Hatch–Waxman Act, it succeeded only in
inserting a weaker provision. TRIPS leaves the phrase “unfair commercial use” undeﬁned, and establishes
no time period of inviolable protection. Thus, the US and EU implementations of article 39.3 are “TRIPS-
plus,” offering stronger protections than international law requires (Pugatch, 2005). Because WTO
membership only obliges countries to abide by TRIPS, membership alone cannot directly explain why
countries choose to adopt TRIPS-plus interpretations of TRIPS provisions. However, a correlation
between WTO membership an increased probability of protecting regulatory data would warrant further
investigation to determine what role WTO membership plays.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

7

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

Economic Development and Competition
The relationship between intellectual property law and economic development is complex, and the causal
relationships are not well understood (Chang, 2001; Hudson and Minea, 2013). However, some studies
have found a positive correlation between strong intellectual property rights and economic growth under
certain conditions (Gould and Gruben, 1996; Maskus, 2000). Generally speaking, developed countries
provide stronger intellectual property protection than less developed countries (Ginarte and Park, 1997).
The political and economic advice given by developed countries to developing countries often
encourage the latter to adopt stronger intellectual property rights in order to promote development, both
internally and by attracting foreign investment and stimulating trade.5 Some studies have found a link
between strong intellectual property laws and increased foreign investment ﬂows, although such laws can
also encourage foreign ﬁrms to engage in less FDI and more licensing and joint ventures, particularly
pharmaceutical ﬁrms (Braga and Fink, 1998; Branstetter et al., 2006; Lee and Mansﬁeld, 1996; Maskus,
1998). However, other work suggests that the effects foreign investment are more strongly linked to
geographic proximity to major investor states and the target country’s market size and human capital
resources (Kanwar, 2012; Nunnenkamp and Spatz, 2004).

With respect to regulatory data protection in particular, countries may believe that adopting such
protection will grant them a competitive edge when compared to other states. This might occur if providing
regulatory data protection helps attract foreign business and investment to a state, although there is
evidence to suggest that it does not (Malpani, 2009). Alternatively, regulatory data protection might
encourage innovation and creativity in the domestic pharmaceutical sector, thereby making a state’s
domestic economy more competitive. But the originator pharmaceutical industry—that is, the research-
based pharmaceutical ﬁrms that stand to beneﬁt from protection—is concentrated in the United States and
Western Europe, and not in the developing countries that are now adopting regulatory data protection.
Furthermore, regulatory data protection applies equally to domestic and foreign ﬁrms, and thus conveys no
unique competitive advantage to domestic ﬁrms (Adamini et al., 2009).

In fact, the actual effect, if any, of regulatory data protection on economic development is largely
irrelevant to the decision to adopt. This is because the success or failure of a law or policy does not
determine whether it will diffuse (Sharman, 2008; Soule, 1999). What matters is the effect a state presumes
adopting a policy will have. It is inappropriate to use measures of presumed effects, such as increases in
foreign direct investment or trade, as independent variables for two reasons. First, existing empirical
research on the effects of regulatory data protection does not specify either the direction or magnitude of
correlations we should expect. Second, and more importantly, any effects come after the decision to adopt,
and thus cannot be used to explain why adoption occurred. Decision makers do not know the results of a
new policy in advance; they only know what they believe the results will be. As a result, I avoid using
measures of policy success as potential indicators of diffusion, instead relying on the qualitative analysis to
help illuminate the motivations behind adoption.

International Organizations, Learning and Geography
Political science research demonstrates that international organizations can shape the norms and policy
decisions of states, and policy diffusion research has speciﬁcally identiﬁed ways in which international
organizations facilitate learning among member states (Finnemore, 1993; Park, 2007; Stone, 2004).
Similarly, national organizations can facilitate learning among subnational entities (F€uglister, 2012).
Thus, international organizations might play a role in the diffusion of regulatory data protection. In fact,
technical assistance has been speciﬁcally identiﬁed as facilitating the spread of stronger intellectual
property laws (Matthews and Munoz-Tellez, 2006).

The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), a specialized United Nations agency, conducts
hundreds of technical assistance activities each year, focusing especially on developing countries. WIPO

8

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

technical assistance takes many forms. It can consist of reports or briefs enumerating best practices and
designed to aid in the implementation of such practices in a given country; it can be equipment and
software provided to facilitate patent examination or establish databases for the registration of intellectual
property; often, it involves WIPO ofﬁcials visiting a foreign country to conduct training, or bringing
foreign ofﬁcials to WIPO for training. WIPO could serve as a mechanism by which certain understandings
of appropriate intellectual property policy spread throughout member states.

States may also learn from or emulate one another (Shipan and Volden, 2008). Indeed, much of the
initial interest in diffusion was driven by striking observations of policy adoptions clustered in time and
space, for example, of economic liberalization or social sector reform (Simmons and Elkins, 2004;
Weyland, 2006). Existing literature tends to emphasize the importance of geographical proximity for
learning, both between and within states (Glick and Friedland, 2014; Simmons, 2009). However, at a
theoretical level, there is often little reason to expect certain mechanisms of diffusion to operate more
effectively for neighbors than for non-neighbors. For example, weaker states all over the world are subject
to coercive pressure, economic competitors are not necessarily close together, and distant countries may
well serve as better models for learning and imitation than those nearby, particularly if distant countries
possess other characteristics that make them good models. For that matter, clustering in space is neither
necessary nor sufﬁcient evidence of policy diffusion: some policies (such as intellectual property policies)
diffuse with little or no geographic clustering, and even geographically close adoptions of similar policies
may be driven by exogenous factors (e.g., water conservation policies are likely to cluster because of
exogenous environmental characteristics, not because of diffusion).

The next section employs event history analysis to test the hypotheses described in this section, and to
address the possibility that the alternative explanations just described might account for the pattern of
adoptions observed.

3 Quantitative Analysis
Data
The 14 countries that adopted such laws prior to 1990 are excluded because they were the very ﬁrst
countries to create such intellectual property rights.6 These countries are highly developed and home to
originator pharmaceutical ﬁrms, and thus face different considerations than the bulk of countries that
adopted regulatory data protection after 1990.7 Additionally, I exclude seventeen countries with a 2012
population of less than 250,000, since consistent time-series data on independent variables for these small
countries are unavailable.8 The collected data cover 160 countries, with observations for the years from
1990 to 2012. Country-year observations cease after a country adopts regulatory data protection, resulting
in a total of 2,986 observations for most variables.

Data for the dependent variable (i.e., whether a country adopts regulatory data protection or not) were
gathered primarily from a series of reports published by the International Federation of Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers and Associations (IFPMA), an international industry group for originator pharmaceutical
ﬁrms.9 I supplemented these data with information from the WIPO Lex, an online database of WIPO
member state laws (World Intellectual Property Organization, 2014c). I also gathered additional data from
the United States Trade Representative Ofﬁce’s Special 301 annual reports (such reports often contain
information on newly implemented intellectual property laws), the WTO Accession Commitments
Database (which details the speciﬁcs of a country’s intellectual property laws at the time of accession), and
several secondary sources discussing regulatory data protection legislation in speciﬁc regions (Bucknell,
2011; Ceron and Godoy, 2009; Roffe et al., 2006; World Trade Organization, 2014a).10 While all WTO
members are obligated to protect regulatory data from unfair commercial use, they are not required to
create intellectual property rights in regulatory data. Thus, I deﬁne a dichotomous dependent variable,

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

9

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

coding as 0 countries that either do not have any law dealing with regulatory data, or only meet the TRIPS
standard of protecting such data from unfair commercial use. I code as 1 countries that provide a
TRIPS-plus level of protection, such as preventing any reliance on regulatory data for a set period of time.
The minimum period observed is ﬁve years, the same as the period set in the US Hatch–Waxman Act, but
some countries have offered protection lasting six years, ten years or even longer. However, wherever such
protection exists, its substantive effect is similar: it prevents the entry of generic competitors to already
approved drugs.

I use the year of a law’s adoption, rather than its implementation, as there may be a gap of several years
between adoption and implementation. When regulatory data protection is offered through self-executing
treaty provisions, I use the date of the signing of the treaty, rather than its ratiﬁcation.11 In rare cases,
countries provide private commitments to adopt laws protecting regulatory data, in the form of
“assurances” or “understandings.” Because such commitments generally have limited legal effect, I do not
include them in my dataset.

Hypothesis 1 suggests that countries negotiating a trade or bilateral intellectual property agreement
with the United States will be more likely to adopt regulatory data protection, due primarily to US
coercion. If this hypothesis is true, I expect a signiﬁcant correlation between the presence of a US trade or
bilateral intellectual property agreement and whether a country adopts regulatory data protection. To
account for the potential inﬂuence of US trade agreements, I include a dichotomous, time-varying variable,
coded as 0 in years prior to the year in which an agreement was signed, and coded as 1 thereafter. I collected
data on these agreements primarily from the World Bank, supplemented with information from the Ofﬁce
of the United States Trade Representative and secondary sources. I include full-ﬂedged free trade
agreements, which cover virtually all areas of trade, as well as more speciﬁc bilateral intellectual property
agreements. I do not include Trade and Investment Framework agreements (TIFAs), as these agreements
are more vague and less comprehensive than either full trade agreements or bilateral intellectual property
agreements. Out of the 160 countries in the dataset, 24 had trade or intellectual property agreements with
the United States.

Hypothesis 2 suggests that countries negotiating accession to the EU will be more likely to adopt
regulatory data protection, due primarily to EU coercion. As above, if this hypothesis is true, I expect a
signiﬁcant correlation between a country’s status as an EU applicant and whether it adopted such laws.
Thus, I include a dichotomous, time-varying variable, coded as 0 in years prior to the ﬁrst year in which a
country applied for EU membership, and coded as 1 thereafter.

In order to test for any effect of WTO membership on a country’s likelihood of protecting regulatory
data, I include a dichotomous, time-varying variable indicating a country’s membership status in a given
year (World Trade Organization, 2014b). Of course, correlations between this variable and the dependent
variable could implicate mechanisms of diffusion other than the inﬂuence of an international organization;
for example, the WTO’s accession process allows powerful incumbents like the United States the
opportunity to extract costly concessions from prospective members (Jones, 2009). However, it also
empowers weak member states by allowing them to block the accession of prospective members, for
example, Georgia’s opposition to Russia’s accession (Schneider and Urpelainen, 2012).

To account for the possibility that states protect regulatory data in order to promote economic
development, I include measures of logged GDP per capita, based on World Bank data (World Bank,
2014). I considered a variety of measures that could be expected to correlate with domestic innovative
capacity, such as a dichotomous measure of pharmaceutical research and development capacity provided
by the World Health Organization (WHO), as well as the number of pharmaceutical patents granted in a
country. In theory, countries with high innovative capacity would have more reason to adopt laws
protecting regulatory data than those that lack innovative capacity. Detailed time-series cross-sectional
data on the pharmaceutical industry is difﬁcult to obtain; ultimately I chose to include the logged number of

10

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

patent applications made by a country’s residents as a potential measure of domestic innovative capacity.
WIPO collects patent data from its members states; however, patent application data are available only for
1,154 country-year observations, or 39% of the total observations (World Intellectual Property
Organization, 2014a). As a result, I only include this variable in an alternate model.

In order to test for the possibility of inﬂuence by international organizations, I create a variable that
counts the number of WIPO technical assistance activities occurring in a country during a given year.12
Because WIPO conducts a large variety of training missions on many topics, I limited consideration to
activities that speciﬁcally mentioned pharmaceuticals as well as general or patent-related TRIPS
implementation. Since protecting regulatory data (at least from “unfair commercial use”) is an important
TRIPS implementation topic, it is likely to have been discussed during general TRIPS implementation
assistance activities. WIPO’s data on technical assistance only covers years from 2000 to the present. For
years prior to 2000, I assume that no relevant training activities took place for two reasons. First, such
activities would only have been relevant after 1995, when the WTO’s TRIPS came into force. Second, both
developing countries (which under WTO rules designate themselves) and former communist countries had
no obligation to apply most of TRIPS, including article 39.3, which discusses regulatory data, until 2000.
As discussed, the theoretical case for spatial correlation between adopters of the laws I consider is
weak, although I might observe geographical clustering among EU applicants. In order to account for
geographical effects, I create a variable indicating the number of contiguous countries that have adopted
similar laws in a prior year.13 This variable captures the intuitive deﬁnition of “neighbor”; in contrast,
using the proportion of neighbors might understate the inﬂuence of contiguous adopters for countries with
many neighbors. In any case, I experiment with alternative speciﬁcations of this variable, which I discuss
as part of my robustness checks.

Table 1 summarizes the variables, units and data sources used in the regressions, and Table 2 presents

summary statistics for these variables.

Model
My quantitative analysis employs event history analysis, otherwise known as survival regression. Event
history analysis is a standard technique for the quantitative analysis of diffusion widely used across
subﬁelds of political science (Berry and Berry, 1990; Bush, 2011; Francesco, 2012; Kim, 2013; Shipan and
Volden, 2006; Sugiyama, 2008; Tucker et al., 2012). Event history analysis permits inferences about the
inﬂuence of covariates on the probability of some event occurring, allows for the incorporation of time-
varying covariates, and handles right-censored data (i.e., units in which the event of interest did not occur

Variable
Regulatory data protection
GDP per capita
Polity score
I membership
EU applicant
Patent applications
US trade or IP agreement
WIPO assistance
Contiguous adopters

Table 1: Description of Regression Variables

Unit

Binary dummy

Logged inflation-adjusted US dollars
Score ranging from  10 to þ10

Binary dummy
Binary dummy

Logged (Integer 0þ 1)

Binary dummy
Integer 0
Integer 0

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

Source
Original

World Bank

Marshall (2013)

WTO

European Union

WIPO

World Bank, etc.

WIPO
Original

11

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

Table 2: Summary Statistics

Variable
Regulatory data protection
GDP per capita
Polity score
WTO member
EU applicant
Patent applications
US trade or IP agreement
WIPO assistance
Contiguous adopters

n

2986
2754
2698
2986
2986
1154
2986
2986
2986

Min.

0
4
 10
0
0
1
0
0
0

x
0
7
4
1
0
5
0
0
0

x

0
7
2
1
0
5
0
0
0

Max

1
11
10
1
1
11
1
4
9

s
0
1
6
0
0
2
0
0
1

#NA

0
232
288
0
0

1832

0
0
0

during the entire period of observation) (Box-Steffensmeier and Jones, 2004). In this article, the event is
the adoption of a TRIPS-plus intellectual property law protecting regulatory data. Because I have no
reason to expect any particular pattern of diffusion, I avoid using a parameterized hazard function, instead
opting for the Cox proportional hazards model. All independent variables are lagged by one year in order to
ensure that changes in covariates come before changes in the dependent variable (Box-Steffensmeier and
Jones, 2004, p. 110).

Regression
Table 3 presents the results of the event history analysis for three different models. The table reports log
hazard coefﬁcients, with robust standard errors in parentheses. Robust standard errors are calculated to
account for clustering among groups of related observations (countries) (Box-Steffensmeier and Jones,
2004, p. 115). Log hazard coefﬁcients less than zero mean that an increase in a variable is associated with
a decreased probability of a country adopting a law protecting clinical trial data. Conversely, log hazard
coefﬁcients greater than zero mean that an increase in a variable is associated with an increased probability
of adoption. A log hazard coefﬁcient of exactly zero would indicate that a variable has no effect on the
probability of adoption.

Model 1 includes typical control variables: logged GDP per capita, a country’s Polity score, and a
country’s WTO membership. In this simple model, higher GDP per capita is correlated with an increased
likelihood of protecting regulatory data. This ﬁnding is unsurprising, given that developed economies in
general tend to provide stronger intellectual property protection (Ginarte and Park, 1997). While a
country’s Polity score is also statistically signiﬁcant in this model, the substantive effect of the variable is
quite small. WTO membership is insigniﬁcant, which lends support to the claim that TRIPS obligations
cannot logically explain why countries offer TRIPS-plus protection for regulatory data.

Model 2 adds several additional variables. The effect of EU applicant status and US trade and bilateral
intellectual property agreements, both chosen to indicate potential coercion as discussed in hypotheses
1and 2, are far and away the most substantively and statistically signiﬁcant variables. Both factors are
associated with large increases in the probability that a country will protect regulatory data. As in Model 1,
logged GDP per capita remains positive and statistically signiﬁcant, although the effect weakens. A
country’s polity score is no longer statistically signiﬁcant. As before, WTO membership remains
insigniﬁcant. The variable counting WIPO technical assistance missions is also insigniﬁcant. However,
the number of contiguous adopters, chosen to indicate the possibility of mimicry between geographical
neighbors, has a small positive and statistically signiﬁcant effect. Model 2 also ﬁts the data far better than
Model 1, as indicated by the log likelihood, likelihood ratio tests and Akaike information criteria.

12

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

Table 3: Cox Proportional Hazards Models with Time-Varying Covariates

Coefficient
GDP per capita

Polity IV

WTO member

EU applicant

US FTA

WIPO technical assistance

Contiguous adopters

Patent applications

AIC
Num. of events
Num. of obs.
Log likelihood
Likelihood ratio




p < 0.001.
p < 0.01.
p < 0.05.

Model 1


0.73
(0.10)

0.08
(0.03)
0.53
(0.46)

Model 2


0.39
(0.14)
 0.01
(0.03)
0.56
(0.50)
2.15
(0.39)
2.93
(0.40)
0.51
(0.40)

0.35
(0.12)





422.70
52
2518
 208
73.74

356.10
52
2518
 171
148.34





Model 3


0.46
(0.20)
 0.07

(0.03)
1.22
(0.64)
1.80
(0.40)
2.17
(0.51)

0.90
(0.45)
0.16
(0.14)
0.14
(0.11)
265.90
43
1062
 125
87.44

Model 3 modiﬁes Model 2 by incorporating one additional variable indicating the logged number of
patent applications from a country’s residents. This variable serves to indicate domestic innovative
capacity. Because data are not available for all observations, the total number of observations declines
signiﬁcantly, although only nine events are lost. In Model 3, both variables chosen to test hypotheses 1 and
2 remain positive, large, and statistically signiﬁcant. Logged GDP per capita also remains positive and
statistically signiﬁcant. In contrast, the variables selected as indicators of the inﬂuence of international
organizations and mimicry swap statistical signiﬁcance: WIPO technical assistance just crosses the
threshold of signiﬁcance, while the number of contiguous adopters is no longer signiﬁcant.

To summarize the results of all three models, the two variables with large, positive and statistically
signiﬁcant effects are those indicating whether a country is an EU applicant, and whether it has a trade or
bilateral intellectual property agreement with the United States. Increases in logged GDP per capita are
consistently correlated with a higher likelihood of protecting regulatory data, while neither Polity scores
nor a country’s WTO membership have any clear effect. Alternative explanations, such as the argument
that countries might protect regulatory data in order to spur domestic innovation, as a result of the inﬂuence
of international organizations or because they are mimicking the policies of neighboring countries, ﬁnd
little statistical support in these models: variables measuring domestic pharmaceutical patent applications,
WIPO technical assistance missions and the number of neighbor adopters have no clear or consistent
effects.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

13

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

Variable
GDP per capita

EU applicant

Table 4: Hazard Rates for Model 2

Description

One unit change

(increase in logged GDP per capita)

From 0 to 1

(from non-applicant to EU applicant)

US trade agreement

From 0 to 1

(from no agreement to U.S. trade agreement)





p < 0.001.
p < 0.01.
p < 0.05.

Change




48%
(13%, 93%)
757%
(300%, 1733%)
1780%
(755%, 4032%)



Log hazard coefﬁcients are difﬁcult to directly interpret. To ease interpretation, Table 4 reports the
percentage increase in the likelihood that a country will adopt a law protecting regulatory data, given a one-
unit change in a speciﬁc independent variable. Table 4 includes only the three independent variables with
consistent substantively and statistically signiﬁcant coefﬁcient estimates.

The likelihood that a country will protect regulatory data increases dramatically if the country has a
trade or bilateral intellectual property agreement with the US. Such a country is over eighteen times
more likely to offer this TRIPS-plus protection than a country without such an agreement. EU
applicants are also signiﬁcantly more likely to protect regulatory data, over eight times more likely than
countries that are not EU applicants. Logged GDP per capita also have a positive effect, although it is
dwarfed by the dummy variables for US agreements and EU applicants. For a one-unit change in logged
GDP per capita, a country is 48% more likely to protect regulatory data. The precise estimates for these
effects should be viewed within the context of their conﬁdence intervals, reported below the estimates
in parentheses. Even when considering the low end of the 95% conﬁdence interval, the effects remain
substantively signiﬁcant.

Robustness Checks
My ﬁnding of large, positive, statistically signiﬁcant correlations between US trade and bilateral
intellectual property agreements, EU applicants, and the likelihood of adopting laws protecting regulatory
data are robust to a variety of changes in assumptions about the data and models. None of the models
violate the proportional hazards assumption that is core to estimating Cox proportional hazards models.
The observed effects remain even when expanding the dataset to cover the years back to 1984, and even
when including a number of states with small populations of less than 250,000.

In alternative model speciﬁcations, I included additional variables to denote the presence of free trade
agreements with the EU and Japan, since such agreements might present the same opportunities for
coercion that I hypothesize exist in US trade and bilateral intellectual property agreements. However,
neither EU nor Japanese trade agreements produced any signiﬁcant effect in these alternative models, and
did not substantively alter my ﬁndings.

To test the robustness of my geographical contiguity variable, I experimented with deﬁning a similar
dichotomous variable based on proximity between countries. Countries that had already protected
regulatory data and were closer than a critical threshold value of distance were counted as neighbors.
Various speciﬁcations of this critical value produced no signiﬁcant difference in the models.

In addition to observing the number of WIPO technical assistance events for a given country-year, I
experimented with keeping a running total of all such events for a given country. If repeated exposure to

14

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

such events over time had a stronger effect than a just a few events, such a running total might have been
statistically signiﬁcant. However, this alternate speciﬁcation produced no signiﬁcant differences.

4 Qualitative Analysis
Both US trade and bilateral intellectual property agreements and EU applicant status are strongly
correlated with an increased likelihood that a country will adopt new intellectual property laws protecting
regulatory data, even when controlling for a variety of other factors and including variables to account for
alternative explanations. US trade agreements and EU accession agreements generally explicitly spell out
obligations involving regulatory data protection. Thus, the strong effects of these dummy variables are not
necessarily surprising. However, the fact that a trade or accession agreement imposes an obligation on a
country does not by itself provide any evidence that the country was coerced into adopting a law to fulﬁll
the obligation. The results of the event history analysis models thus provide a preliminary, but incomplete
case for hypotheses 1 and 2.

This section uses qualitative data to explore the precise causal mechanisms at work. I rely heavily on
State Department diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks. Beginning in February 2010, and continuing
until September 2011, WikiLeaks, a non-proﬁt organization devoted to publishing leaked information
from whistleblowers, released over a quarter million internal diplomatic cables sent between the US
Department of State’s headquarters, embassies, consulates and other missions around the world. The
earliest cables date from 1966, and the most recent from 2010, although the vast majority of the cables date
from about 2000 to 2010. Based on these leaked diplomatic cables, as well as public EU accession
documents, I show that the statistical correlations identiﬁed in the previous section represent instances of
US and EU coercion.

Trade Agreements with the United States: The US–Oman FTA
Models 2 and 3 suggest that if a country has a trade agreement or bilateral intellectual property agreement
with the United States, it will be more likely to offer IP protection for regulatory data. While such an
association could indicate coercion on the part of the United States, statistical relationships alone do not
offer enough evidence. I employ process tracing to determine whether and how such agreements lead to
countries adopting these laws. Speciﬁcally, I examine interactions between the US and Omani
governments leading to the conclusion of the US–Oman Free Trade Agreement. Oman adopted regulatory
data protection legislation in 2008, immediately prior to the US–Oman FTA entering into force.

Oman’s adoption of regulatory data protection is an archetypical case of coercive policy diffusion.
Oman became a WTO member in November 2000. Prior to a country’s joining the WTO, the WTO’s
General Council establishes a working party to study the accession request. Working parties are formally
open to all current WTO members, and when large countries request to join the WTO, working parties may
consist of many WTO members. However, for smaller countries, working parties usually only consist of a
few speciﬁc WTO members: the United States, the EU, Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand,
Switzerland, perhaps a few large developing countries (e.g., Brazil and India) and WTO members that are
neighbors of the acceding country (Michalopoulos, 1999, p. 5).

institutions,

The prospective WTO member must prepare a memorandum explaining its current policies and
government
including in areas beyond trade. Working party members examine this
memorandum and ask questions of the prospective member, a process which can take years. Negotiations
on tariff levels take place, ﬁrst when the prospective member submits an initial offer to the working party,
and later in bilateral negotiation between the prospective member and any current WTO member that
wants to engage in such negotiations. Finally, when negotiations are complete, the WTO secretariat
produces a draft accession report that must be approved by the working party. This report contains the

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

15

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

agreed-upon commitments established during the negotiations with the acceding country. If approved by
the working party, the report is sent for formal approval to the General Council, and the country can ﬁnally
sign an accession protocol (Michalopoulos, 1999, p. 9).

Working party reports contain details of the questions asked by working party members, as well as the
answers and clariﬁcations provided by prospective WTO members. Thus, in addition to the detailed
schedules of tariff rates, these reports serve as a record of the commitments prospective WTO members
have made. In some cases, working party reports contain commitments made by prospective members that
go beyond the minimum obligations required of WTO members. For example, working party reports
sometimes contain commitments by prospective WTO members to implement TRIPS-plus policies, even
though WTO membership only requires TRIPS-compliant policies. Strong data exclusivity is a prime
example of such a TRIPS-plus commitment that sometimes appears in WTO working party reports,
although broader “WTO-plus” commitments also exist (Qin, 2003).

Oman’s WTO accession working party report contains no mention of regulatory data protection at all;
thus, there is no evidence it was requested or committed to provide TRIPS-plus standards of protection at
the time of its accession. On the contrary, in May 2000, Oman passed an intellectual property law clearly
aimed at complying with its TRIPS obligations prior to joining the WTO that did not offer an exclusive
intellectual property right for regulatory data (World Intellectual Property Organization, 2000, article 34).
Bilateral trade negotiations between the United States and Oman began in March 2005 and ended in
September 2005, although the FTA did not enter into force until January 2009 (United States Trade
Representative, 2005). In contrast to Oman’s accession to the WTO, the US–Oman FTA contains
provisions requiring both parties to offer strong data exclusivity (United States Trade Representative,
2009, article 15.9). Though it already had had TRIPS-compliant provisions regarding regulatory data since
2000, Oman passed a new intellectual property law in May 2008. The new law offered TRIPS-plus
protection for regulatory data, and the language of the new law mirrors the language found in the
US–Oman FTA (World Intellectual Property Organization, 2008, section 65(4)).

This timeline alone strongly suggests that the only reason Oman adopted strong data exclusivity was
to satisfy US demands pursuant to the negotiation of an FTA. However, a series of diplomatic cables from
the US Embassy in Muscat sent between 2007 and 2008 provide additional evidence to support this
conclusion. FTA negotiations included speciﬁc discussions about IP protection for regulatory data. A
cable dated 26 February 2007 explains:

The Omani government has worked extensively with USG [United States government]
counterparts to revise its already strong intellectual property regime in advance of the
implementation of the FTA . . . Oman will also improve enforcement and protection of
undisclosed test data from unfair commercial use (US Department of State, 2007b).

However, Oman did not want to offer TRIPS-plus protection for regulatory data. A cable dated 8
August 2007 reports that the Omani Commerce and Industry Minister Maqbool bin Ali Sultan “again
relayed his concern that the USG was treating Oman differently from other FTA partners with respect
to data protection,” (US Department of State, 2007a).14 Meanwhile, an Omani ofﬁcial in the Ministry of
Health expressed concern about the impact of the FTA on pharmaceutical prices in Oman, noting that
Oman provides healthcare free of charge to its citizens (US Department of State, 2007a). Another cable
reports that
the Omani government
eventually lost its way, becoming frustrated with what was viewed as unreasonable U.S. demands” and
notes that “Oman’s fear that the FTA’s strong intellectual property protections would impede its ability
to obtain needed pharmaceutical products” was a “major sticking point,” (US Department of State,
2008a).

in the process of “developing FTA-compliant regulations,

16

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

FTA negotiations had a direct impact on Omani domestic law. In a cable dated September 5, 2007
discussing a meeting between US Ambassador to Oman Gary Grappo and the Omani Minister of
Commerce and Industry Maqbool bin Ali Sultan, embassy staff write “The Ambassador reminded the
Minister that USTR would not be able to accept Oman’s data protection language as drafted in its industrial
property law . . . Maqbool promised to discuss this request with the Minister of Health,” (US Department of
State, 2007c). By February of 2008, the embassy reported “Oman will also improve enforcement and
protection of undisclosed test data from unfair commercial use. Both revised laws, which included input
from the USG, are undergoing ﬁnal review,” (US Department of State, 2008b).

Given this evidence, it is safe to say that Oman adopted TRIPS-plus regulatory data protection as a
concession to demands from the US government. Oman already had a TRIPS-compliant law in place. Only
after it completed trade negotiations with the United States did it adopt a strong data exclusivity law. These
negotiations included explicit demands from the United States to change its law, demands that were met
with resistance from multiple Omani government ofﬁcials. In the face of continued US pressure, Oman
eventually capitulated and adopted a new law offering TRIPS-plus protection for regulatory data.15

European Union Membership
Models 2 and 3 identiﬁed EU applicant status as another substantively and statistically signiﬁcant factor
associated with a country’s likelihood of adopting regulatory data protection. Virtually all applicants to the
EU adopt regulatory data protection after applying, but prior to joining. Of the 25 post-1986 EU applicants,
21 follow this pattern. From a legal perspective, this is hardly surprising. As a condition of membership,
states acceding to the EU must implement the acquis communautaire, that is, the body of EU law. Since
regulatory data protection is part of the acquis, new members must offer such protection.

However, simply because EU members are required to adopt regulatory data protection does not
necessarily mean that EU membership caused them to adopt it. Other factors may be responsible. EU
members or applicants might choose to adopt regulatory data protection for independent reasons, such as
to support a domestic pharmaceutical industry that could beneﬁt from the policy. Furthermore, the
requirements of EU membership do not necessarily explain why EU applicants adopt regulatory data
protection when accession is still years away. On average, EU applicants that eventually join the EU adopt
regulatory data protection approximately four years before acceding.

EU accession documents provide evidence that the EU accession process is a driving force behind the
diffusion of regulatory data protection. During the period leading up to EU accession, the EU observes,
advises and reports on future members’ steps toward transposing the acquis into national law. EU
enlargement reports demonstrate that the European Commission (the executive branch of the EU)
carefully reviews applicants’ steps toward adopting regulatory data protection. Commission documents
speciﬁcally mention the issue when discussing the accessions of Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia and Croatia.
For example, in 2001, the Commission bemoaned Poland’s lack of progress:

In the ﬁeld of pharmaceuticals, the framework Law on Pharmaceuticals was adopted in
September 2001. This law will enter into force in January 2002, with exception of some
provisions which will come into force at the date of accession. With respect to data exclusivity,
this delayed entry into force will create serious difﬁculties in the short term (European
Commission, 2001).

Later Commission reports on Slovakia’s and Slovenia’s accession progress identify the national laws
transposing the acquis’s regulatory data protection provisions. Commission reports also highlight
instances in which EU applicants have failed to make adequate progress. For example, a Commission
report on Croatia’s accession explained that even though Croatia had a relevant law on the books, “further

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

17

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

efforts are needed to achieve full alignment in particular as regards data exclusivity in pharmaceutical
products, veterinary medicinal products and pre-packaging,” (European Commission, 2012). The
Commission’s monitoring report on Hungary’s accession includes similar
remarks (European
Commission, 2003).

There is no evidence to suggest that EU applicants wanted to adopt regulatory data protection for
internal reasons. On the contrary, US State Department diplomatic cables offer an outsider’s perspective
on the EU accession process. These cables consistently report that EU applicants were in no hurry to
implement regulatory data protection, and in some cases applicants took active steps to delay
implementation. Thus, I cannot attribute adoption to domestic demand, competitive pressures, policy
learning or imitation.

For example, in 2005, the US embassy in Bratislava complained that Slovakian government had been
storing clinical trial data in the ofﬁces of a generic pharmaceutical ﬁrm for years (US Department of State,
2005a). Embassy staff implied that by making this data available to others, the Slovakian government
actively aided a local generic pharmaceutical ﬁrm. The US Trade Representative repeated this claim in its
2005 Special 301 Report. The United States removed Slovakia from the Special 301 Watch List in 2006,
citing improvements in the protection of clinical trial data. However, these improvements cannot be
attributed to US pressure. Slovakia had been on the Special 301 Watch List every year since 2001. Rather,
the improvements came about as a result of Slovakia’s implementation of EU accession requirements.
Another US diplomatic cable from Bratislava conﬁrms this timeline: “In a very positive step, [the
Slovakian] parliament approved the Amendment to the Medicines Act . . . the section of the amendment
transposing the EU Directive on data exclusivity also passed without any changes,” (US Department of
State, 2006c).

Several other US diplomatic cables conﬁrm that when EU applicants adopt regulatory data protection,
they do so almost entirely as a result of their obligations to the EU, and not due to any other factors. A US
diplomatic cable from Warsaw reported that as late as 2007, Poland, Lithuania, Malta and Hungary were
all seeking to delay the implementation of a recently adopted EU directive extending periods of protection
for regulatory data. Poland led the revolt, arguing that since the EU had adopted the directive a month prior
to its accession, Poland had had no input, and thus was entitled to resist implementation of the directive.
The US embassy noted that Poland’s goal was “to decrease drug prices as quickly as possible by
introducing generic competition,” (US Department of State, 2007d).

For EU applicants, the pattern is clear: these countries adopt regulatory data protection sometime
between their date of application to the EU and their date of accession. The European Commission
carefully monitors progress towards compliance with the acquis. While the United States may try to
persuade EU applicants to speed up their adoption of this protection, the obligations of EU accession are
the motivating factor. These obligations are coercive because they require states to adopt a policy that they
would not otherwise have chosen to adopt. The absence of evidence pointing to any domestic interest in
regulatory data protection, combined with the evidence that EU applicants actively sought to resist or delay
implementation of such protection, strengthens the case for coercive diffusion.

Alternative Explanations
While the regression results do not clearly support any alternative explanations, I sought out qualitative
evidence for other mechanisms of diffusion, which I address in this section.

Neither diplomatic cables nor any other qualitative data provide much evidence that competitive
considerations played an important role in whether or not a country adopted regulatory data protection.16
Among the relatively few countries in the dataset that have a strong domestic pharmaceutical industry, that
industry is primarily generic. Countries with major originator pharmaceutical industries were the earlier
adopters of regulatory data protection and do not feature in the dataset. Since regulatory data protection is

18

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

generally a commercial impediment for generic pharmaceutical ﬁrms, I would expect such ﬁrms and their
host countries to oppose such protection, since doing so will convey a competitive advantage to the
domestic generic industry. This was the case in Jordan. Even years after it concluded its FTA with the
United States, US diplomatic cables report that Jordan continued to narrowly interpret its FTA obligations,
including the provisions regarding regulatory data, a tactic supported by the Jordanian pharmaceutical
industry (US Department of State, 2004, 2006a).

On the other hand, even if regulatory data protection poses a competitive disadvantage to generic
domestic pharmaceutical industries, countries may accept such provisions because other aspects of the
FTA prove beneﬁcial to them. For example, in mid-2006 Peru’s domestic pharmaceutical industry
completely changed its position on the US–Peru Trade Promotion Agreement. Although it had initially
opposed the agreement, and still opposed the data protection provisions, on 9 May 2006, the Peruvian
Pharmaceutical Association announced that it supported the PTPA. Struggling to explain the position
change, the US Embassy in Lima spoke with the former president of the association, who “indicated that
several of ADIFAN’s larger members saw the FTA as an opportunity to do business with American
pharmaceutical companies and thus tacitly supported the FTA. ADIFAN’s position change might reﬂect
the power that these larger companies have over the smaller ones,” (US Department of State, 2006b).
As for other mechanisms of diffusion, the diplomatic cables offer some insight into the potential role
of constructivist explanations and learning. Constructivists studying diffusion frequently point to the role
of social ties between policymakers (Finnemore, 1993). Such ties may come from shared educational
experiences, shared participation in professional networks or epistemic communities, or other forms of
contact (Dobbin et al., 2007). Along these lines, US State Department diplomatic cables sometimes
speciﬁcally call out biographical notes of elites that presumably might make them more sympathetic to US
policy preferences. For example, a cable from the US Embassy in Amman reports that eleven alumni of a
US exchange program had recently been appointed as members of the Jordanian Senate. One of these,
Dr. Aref Batayneh, a former minister of health, had participated in a “Voluntary Visitor Program on IPR,
Patent Protection for Pharmaceutical products in 1996,” run by an unnamed US agency (US Department of
State, 2003).

However, mere existence of such ties does not necessarily indicate that participants are sympathetic to
the US position. For example, Santiago Roca, the President of Indecopi, Peru’s IP administrative agency,
earned a Ph.D. in economics from Cornell University. One might assume that a western education in
economics or law could socialize students, including those coming from developing countries, to be
favorable toward intellectual property. Yet under Roca, Indecopi was vehemently opposed to the PTPA,
going so far as to suggest that the entire intellectual property chapter be dropped from the FTA negotiations
(US Department of State, 2005b).

With respect to learning, there is evidence of at least one case in which a country welcomed technical
assistance from the US on regulatory data protection. Diplomatic cables from the US Embassy in Riyadh
indicate that Saudi Arabia was extremely receptive to US positions. One cable discusses a workshop that
took place in June 2009, and “was considered a success by Saudi agencies including the Saudi Food and
Drug Authority (SFDA) and King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) Patent Ofﬁce.”
In fact, the workshop was so successful that the Saudi government requested an additional one. The cable
goes on to note that the Saudi ofﬁcial responsible for IP rights

. . . said his government wanted to learn best practices for DE [data exclusivity] protection
from the United States, European Union, and other countries . . . The Saudi government has
made it very clear there is an open door for DE-related training with both the USG and the
private sector, which they want to use to shape Saudi implementation of its DE protection (US
Department of State, 2009).

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

19

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

Episodes like this one suggest that training and technical assistance may play some role in the
diffusion of regulatory data protection around the world. Saudi Arabia had already adopted strong data
exclusivity in 2005 as part of its WTO accession agreement, so it is not possible to conclude that US
trainings in 2009 played a causal role in the policy adoption. However, even if regulatory data protection
had been demanded by the United States as a condition of Saudi Arabia’s WTO accession, the Saudi
government may have been happy to accept such a condition.

These vignettes provide limited evidence for alternative mechanisms of diffusion. But when
compared to the evidence documenting signiﬁcant coercive pressures exerted by the United States and EU,
I conclude that alternative mechanisms were negligible in the diffusion of regulatory data protection.

5 Conclusion
This article traces the diffusion of regulatory data protection from 14 highly developed countries in 1980s,
to 60 additional countries today. The event history analysis indicated that both US trade agreements and
EU applicant status are strongly correlated with an increased likelihood of adopting regulatory data
protection, even when controlling for other factors. Exploring these broad ﬁndings through qualitative
analysis, I found signiﬁcant evidence of coercion through US FTA and EU accession negotiations.

In contrast, alternative explanations ﬁnd limited support. WTO membership cannot explain why
countries have adopted TRIPS-plus interpretations of TRIPS provisions. While there is a correlation
between a country’s level of economic development and its likelihood of protecting regulatory data, this
relationship is dwarfed by the effects of US and EU coercion. Anecdotal evidence may support
explanations relying on socialization of elites or learning, but these explanations ﬁnd no basis in the
quantitative analysis.

General correlations between economic development and stronger intellectual property rights can
give the impression that developed countries choose to offer stronger intellectual property rights. Yet as
my ﬁndings indicate, there may be far more political causes that lead to the adoption of strong intellectual
property rights. Absent US and EU coercion, far fewer countries around the world would offer regulatory
data protection. Without such protection, generic ﬁrms would be able to market drugs sooner and at lower
costs, generating signiﬁcant savings for both public and private purchasers.

terms, does not represent an international consensus, but

This suggests that the widespread adoption of other TRIPS-plus provisions, such as extended
is instead driven by similar
copyright
mechanisms of coercion. Coercive diffusion has been a longstanding feature of international intellectual
property law (Sell, 1995). For that matter, coercion can be employed in other policy areas, such as human
rights and labor standards (Hafner-Burton, 2005; Postnikov and Bastiaens, 2014).

While coercion can be employed in the service of normatively desirable goals, as I have shown, it can
also be employed to advance the interests of foreign industries, to the detriment of domestic industries and
public health. This adds to a growing body of evidence demonstrating that policy diffusion is not always
beneﬁcial (Shipan and Volden, 2012). While scholars of diffusion have focused on other forms of
coercion, coercive diffusion that makes use of threats is easily masked as mere bargaining. In reality, gross
power imbalances between states effectively allow more powerful states to dictate the domestic policy of
weaker states.

About the Author
Gabriel J. Michael, is a visiting fellow at the Information Society Project, Yale Law School, New Haven,
CT; E-mail: gabriel.j.michael@gmail.com

20

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

Notes
I would like to thank Susan Sell, Henry Farrell, Steven Balla, Eric Lawrence, Sean Flynn, Jack Balkin, the
resident fellows of the Information Society Project and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments
on earlier drafts of this article.
1 For example, Jandhyala et al. (2011); Solıs et al. (2009). Simmons et al. (2008, p. 13) do mention that trade
negotiations with the United States or the European Union might serve as “moments of vulnerability” that could
affect the timing of liberalization, but they do not empirically explore the possibility.
2 On sanction threats, see Drezner (2003); Lacy and Niou (2004); Whang et al. (2013).
3 Loan conditionality is widely cited as a coercive mechanism of diffusion (Braun and Gilardi, 2006; Dobbin et al.,
2007; Elkins et al., 2006; Jandhyala et al., 2011; Sharman, 2008; Simmons et al., 2006; Weyland, 2005), but also
widely criticized, since “conditionality” may in fact be desired or even instigated by domestic policymakers, who
may beneﬁt from shifting blame for unpopular but necessary policy changes to external actors (Drazen, 2002;
Vreeland, 2003; Weyland, 2005). Conditionality also takes place in regional and national contexts (Braun and
Gilardi, 2006; Shipan and Volden, 2012). On hierarchical or vertical coercion, see Bulmer and Padgett (2005);
Daley and Garand (2005); and Shipan and Volden (2008). For various forms of “soft coercion,” see Gruber (2000);
Schelling (1960); and Volden (2006). For constructivist accounts of coercive diffusion, see Goodman and Jinks
(2004); Mintrom and Vergari (1998); and Sharman (2008).

4 While the European Union’s free trade and economic partnership agreements also generally require parties to

protect regulatory data, most of these parties have already been obliged by a prior agreement to do so.

5 For example, European Commission (2014); United States Trade Representative (2014).
6 These countries are the United States (1984) and the members states of the European Union as of 1986 (Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and Great
Britain). Japan is also excluded; while it does not explicitly offer an intellectual property right for regulatory data, it
created a system with similar effects in 1979. Japan is home to several large originator pharmaceutical ﬁrms,
although none rank among the world’s largest dozen.

7 However, I add these countries back into the dataset as part of my robustness checks.
8 The countries consist of Caribbean and Paciﬁc island nations, as well as Andorra and Liechtenstein.
9 The most recent report is publicly available (International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and

Associations, 2011). I obtained older reports directly from the IFPMA.

10 For a complete archive of Special 301 reports, see Knowledge Ecology International (2014).
11 The logic in using the earlier date is that commitment or treaty signing represents the decision of a state to adopt the
provision, and that decision would have been inﬂuenced by contemporaneous or immediately preceding factors.
Ratiﬁcation and implementation may be delayed for a variety of reasons unrelated to the decision to adopt a
provision in the ﬁrst place.

12 I derive the data from the WIPO Technical Assistance Database. As of March 2013, the database has information
on 2,488 missions, meetings and visits, where at least one of the beneﬁciary countries was a developing country,
least developed country or country in transition from a centrally planned economy. The database includes
information for the years 2007–2013, but additional data are also available for the years 2000–2005 (World
Intellectual Property Organization, 2005, 2014b).

13 Shipan and Volden (2006) take a related approach, using the proportion of a state’s neighbors that have adopted a

policy. My geographical data come from the CShapes dataset (Weidmann et al., 2010).

14 Notably, according to the cable’s author, Oman was not the subject of any unusual or special pressure: “Maqbool
continues to cling to the argument that Oman is being treated differently than other FTA partners with regard to the
issue of data protection. To dispel the Minister of this notion, Embassy would like to deliver a letter to Maqbool,
either signed by DUSTR [Deputy U.S. Trade Representative] or by the Ambassador, that explains to the Omani
government that they are being accorded the same treatment as other FTA partners.”

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

21

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

15 Oman is not the only country to have faced such demands from the United States and capitulated. Similar patterns
are evident in both Peru and Jordan, both of which adopted TRIPS-plus regulatory data protection while
negotiating a trade agreement with the United States. The demands of the United States, as well as the reluctance of
the Peruvian and Jordanian governments, are well-supported by both leaked diplomatic cables as well as
secondary literature.

16 Far from being unlikely to mention such considerations, diplomatic cables often report on the local political

context, noting whether domestic industry supports or opposes provisions of interest.

References

Adamini S., Maarse H., Versluis E. and Light D.W. (2009) ‘Policy Making on Data Exclusivity in the European
Union: From Industrial Interests to Legal Realities’, Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 34(6), 979–1010.
Adams C.P. and Brantner V.V. (2006) ‘Estimating The Cost Of New Drug Development: Is It Really $802 Million?’,

Health Affairs 25(2), 420–428.

Baker B.K. (2008) ‘Ending Drug Registration Apartheid: Taming Data Exclusivity and Patent/Registration Linkage’,

American Journal of Law & Medicine 34(2), 303–344.

Baldwin D.A. (1985) Economic Statecraft. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Berry F.S. and Berry W.D. (1990) ‘State Lottery Adoptions as Policy Innovations: An Event History Analysis’,

The American Political Science Review 84(2), 395–415.

Box-Steffensmeier J.M. and Jones B.S. (2004) Event History Modeling: A Guide for Social Scientists. Cambridge

University Press, New York.

Braga C.A.P. and Fink C. (1998) ‘The Relationship between Intellectual Property Rights and Foreign Direct

Investment’, Duke Journal of Comparative & International Law 9(1), 163–188.

Braga C.A.P., Fink C. and Sepulveda C.P. (2000) Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Development. World

Bank, Washington, DC.

Branstetter L.G., Fisman R. and Foley C.F. (2006) ‘Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase International
Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U. S. Firm-Level Panel Data’, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121(1), 321–349.

Braun D. and Gilardi F. (2006) ‘Taking ‘Galton’s Problem’ Seriously Towards a Theory of Policy Diffusion’, Journal

of Theoretical Politics 18(3), 298–322.

Bucknell D. (2011) Pharmaceutical, Biotechnology and Chemical Inventions: World Protection and Exploitation.

Oxford University Press, New York.

Bulmer S. and Padgett S. (2005) ‘Policy Transfer in the European Union: An Institutionalist Perspective’, British

Journal of Political Science 35(1), 103–126.

Bush S.S. (2011) ‘International Politics and the Spread of Quotas for Women in Legislatures’, International

Organization 65(01), 103–137.

Cawthorne, P. (2012) ‘Data Exclusivity a Life and Death Issue’, Bangkok Post [online]. Available at <http://www.
bangkokpost.com/opinion/opinion/308740/data-exclusivity-a-life-and-death-issue> [Accessed February 2013].
Cengiz F. and Hoffmann L. (2013) ‘Rethinking Conditionality: Turkey’s European Union Accession and the Kurdish
Question: Turkey’s EU accession and the Kurdish Question’, JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies 51(3),
416–432.

Ceron A. and Godoy A.S. (2009) ‘Intellectual Property and Access to Medicines: An Analysis of Legislation in

Central America’, Bulletin of the World Health Organization 87(10), 787–793.

Chang H.-J. (2001) ‘Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Development: historical lessons and emerging issues’,

Journal of Human Development 2(2), 287–309.

Daley D.M. and Garand J.C. (2005) ‘Horizontal Diffusion, Vertical Diffusion, and Internal Pressure in State

Environmental Policymaking, 1989–1998’, American Politics Research 33(5), 615–644.

22

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

DiMasi J.A., Hansen R.W. and Grabowski H.G. (2003) ‘The Price of Innovation: New Estimates of Drug

Development Costs’, Journal of Health Economics 22(2), 151–185.

Dobbin F., Simmons B. and Garrett G. (2007) ‘The Global Diffusion of Public Policies: Social Construction,

Coercion, Competition, or Learning?’, Annual Review of Sociology 33(1), 449–472.

Drahos P. (2001) ‘BITs and BIPs’, The  4(6), 791–808.
Drahos P. (2004) ‘The Regulation of Public Goods’, Journal of International Economic Law 7(2), 321–339.
Drahos P., Lokuge B., Faunce T., Goddard M. and Henry D. (2004) ‘Pharmaceuticals, Intellectual Property and Free

Trade: the Jase of the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement’, Prometheus 22(3), 243–257.

Drazen A. (2002) ‘Conditionality and Ownership in IMF Lending: A Political Economy Approach’, IMF Staff

Papers 49.

Drezner D.W. (2003) ‘The Hidden Hand of Economic Coercion’, International Organization 57(03), 643–

659.

Dutﬁeld G. and Suthersanen U. (2005) ‘Harmonisation or Differentiation in Intellectual Property Protection? The

Lessons of History’, Prometheus 23(2), 131–147.

El-Said H. and El-Said M. (2007) ‘TRIPS-Plus Implications for Access to Medicines in Developing Countries:
Lessons from Jordan-United States Free Trade Agreement’,  10(6),
438–475.

Elkins Z., Guzman A.T. and Simmons B.A. (2006) ‘Competing for Capital: The Diffusion of Bilateral Investment

Treaties, 1960–2000’, International Organization 60(4), 811–846.

European Commission. (2001) Regular Report on Poland’s Progress towards Accession, SEC(2001) 1752. European

Commission, Brussels.

European Commission. (2003) Comprehensive Monitoring Report on Hungary’s Preparations for Membership,

COM(2003) 675 ﬁnal. European Commission, Brussels.

European Commission. (2012) Comprehensive Monitoring Report on Croatia, SWD(2012) 338 ﬁnal. European

Commission, Brussels.

Commission European. (2014) Intellectual Property. [online]. Available at <http://ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/

accessing-markets/intellectual-property/> [Accessed September 2014].

Fink C. and Maskus K.E. (2005) Intellectual Property and Development: Lessons from Recent Economic Research,

World Bank Publications, Washington, DC.

Finnemore M. (1993) ‘International Organizations as Teachers of Norms: The United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc

and Cultural Organization and Science Policy’, International Organization 47(4), 565.

Francesco F.D. (2012) ‘Diffusion of Regulatory Impact Analysis Among OECD and EU Member States’,

Comparative Political Studies 45(10), 1277–1305.

F€uglister K. (2012) ‘Where Does Learning Take Place? The Role of Intergovernmental Cooperation in Policy

Diffusion’, European Journal of Political Research 51(3), 316–349.

Ginarte J.C. and Park W.G. (1997) ‘Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-National Study’, Research Policy 26(3),

283–301.

Glick D.M. and Friedland Z. (2014) ‘How Often Do States Study Each Other? Evidence of Policy Knowledge

Diffusion’, American Politics Research 42(6), 956–985.

Goodman R. and Jinks D. (2004) ‘How to Inﬂuence States: Socialization and International Human Rights Law’, Duke

Law Journal 54(3), 621–703.

Gould D.M. and Gruben W.C. (1996) ‘The Role of Intellectual Property Rights in Economic Growth’, Journal of

Development Economics 48(2), 323–350.

Gruber L. (2000) Ruling the World: Power Politics and the Rise of Supranational Institutions. Princeton University

Press, Princeton, NJ.

Hafner-Burton E.M. (2005) ‘Trading Human Rights: How Preferential Trade Agreements Inﬂuence Government

Repression’, International Organization 59(03), 593–629.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

23

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

Hudson J. and Minea A. (2013) ‘Innovation, Intellectual Property Rights, and Economic Development: A Uniﬁed

Empirical Investigation’, World Development 46, 66–78.

International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations. (2011) Data Exclusivity: Encouraging
Development of New Medicines [online]. Available at <http://www.ifpma.org/ﬁleadmin/content/Publication/
IFPMA_2011_Data_Exclusivity__En_Web.pdf> [Accessed September 2014].

Jandhyala S., Henisz W.J. and Mansﬁeld E.D. (2011) ‘Three Waves of BITs The Global Diffusion of Foreign

Investment Policy’, Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 55(6), 1047–1073.

Javorcik B.S. (2004) ‘The Composition of Foreign Direct Investment and Protection of Intellectual Property Rights:

Evidence From Transition Economies’, European Economic Review 48(1), 39–62.

Jones K. (2009) ‘The Political Economy of WTO Accession: The Unﬁnished Business of Universal Membership’,

World Trade Review 8(02), 279–314.

Kanwar S. (2012) ‘The Location of Overseas Research and Development and Intellectual Property Protection’,

Journal of Development Studies 48(10), 1453–1469.

Kapczynski A. (2009) ‘Harmonization and Its Discontents: A Case Study of TRIPS Implementation in India’s

Pharmaceutical Sector’, California Law Review 97(6), 1571–1649.

Kim D. (2013) ‘International Nongovernmental Organizations and the Global Diffusion of National Human Rights

Institutions’, International Organization 67(03), 505–539.

Knowledge Ecology International. (2014) The USTR Special 301 Reports, 1989 to 2014 [online]. Available at <http://

keionline.org/ustr/special301> [Accessed September 2014].

Lacy D. and Niou E.M.S. (2004) ‘A Theory of Economic Sanctions and Issue Linkage: The Roles of Preferences,

Information, and Threats’, Journal of Politics 66(1), 25–42.

Landes W.M. and Posner R.A. (2003) The Economic Structure of Intellectual Property Law. Belknap Press of Harvard

University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Lee J.-Y. and Mansﬁeld E. (1996) ‘Intellectual Property Protection and U.S. Foreign Direct Investment’, The Review

of Economics and Statistics 78(2), 181–186.

Light D.W. and Warburton R. (2011) ‘Demythologizing the High Costs of Pharmaceutical Research’, BioSocieties

6(1), 34–50.

Lopert R. and Gleeson D. (2013) ‘The High Price of “Free” Trade: U.S. Trade Agreements and Access to Medicines’,

The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics 41(1), 199–223.

Malpani R. (2009) ‘All Costs, No Beneﬁts: How the US-Jordan Free Trade Agreement Affects Access to Medicines’,

Journal of Generic Medicines 6(3), 206–217.

Mansﬁeld E.D. and Pevehouse J.C. (2013) ‘The Expansion of Preferential Trading Arrangements’, International

Studies Quarterly 57(3), 592–604.

Marshall M.G. (2013) Polity IV Project: Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800–2012 [online].

Available at <http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm> [Accessed October 2013].

Maskus K.E. (1998) ‘Role of Intellectual Property Rights in Encouraging Foreign Direct Investment and Technology

Transfer’, The Duke Journal of Comparative & International Law 9, 109.

Maskus K.E. (2000) ‘Intellectual Property Rights and Economic Development’, Case Western Reserve Journal of

International Law 32, 471.

Matthews D. and Munoz-Tellez V. (2006) ‘Bilateral Technical Assistance and TRIPS: The United States, Japan and
the European Communities in Comparative Perspective’, The  9(6),
629–653.

Menon J. (2007) ‘Bilateral Trade Agreements’, Asian-Paciﬁc Economic Literature 21(2), 29–47.
Michalopoulos C. (1999) WTO Accession for Countries in Transition [online]. Available at <http://elibrary.

worldbank.org/content/workingpaper/10.1596/1813-9450-1934> [Accessed September 2014].

Mintrom M. and Vergari S. (1998) ‘Policy Networks and Innovation Diffusion: The Case of State Education

Reforms’, The Journal of Politics 60(01), 126–148.

24

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

Nunnenkamp P. and Spatz J. (2004) ‘Intellectual Property Rights and Foreign Direct Investment: A Disaggregated

Analysis’, Review of World Economics 140(3), 393–414.

Olson M. (1971) The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups, number v. 124 in Harvard

Economic Studies. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Park S. (2007) ‘The World Bank Group: Championing Sustainable Development Norms?’, Global Governance 13(4),

535–556.

PhRMA. (2012) PhRMA 2012 Proﬁle: Pharmaceutical Industry [online]. Available at <http://www.phrma.org/sites/

default/ﬁles/159/phrma_industry_proﬁle.pdf> [Accessed September 2014].

Postnikov E. and Bastiaens I. (2014) ‘Does Dialogue Work? The Effectiveness of Labor Standards in EU Preferential

Trade Agreements’, Journal of European Public Policy 21(6), 923–940.

Pugatch M.P. (2005) ‘The International Regulation of IPRS in a TRIPS and TRIPS-plus World’, Journal of World

Investment & Trade 6, 431.

PuSscaSs V. (2014) ‘Accession Negotiations to the European Union’, Studia Europaea 1(1), 5–20.
Qin J.Y. (2003) ‘“WTO-Plus” Obligations and Their Implications for the World Trade Organization Legal System’,

Journal of World Trade 37(3), 483–522.

Reich A. (2004) ‘The WTO as a Law-Harmonizing Institution’, University of Pennsylvania Journal of International

Economic Law 25, 321.

Roffe P., Tansey G. and Vivas Eugui D. (2006) Negotiating Health: Intellectual Property and Access to Medicines.

Earthscan, London, Sterling, VA.

Schelling T.C. (1960) The Strategy of Conﬂict. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Schimmelfennig F. and Sedelmeier U. (2004) ‘Governance by Conditionality: EU Rule Transfer to the Candidate

Countries of Central and Eastern Europe’, Journal of European Public Policy 11(4), 661–679.

Schneider C.J. and Urpelainen J. (2012) ‘Accession Rules for International Institutions A Legitimacy-Efﬁcacy Trade-

Off?’, Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 56(2), 290–312.

Sell S.K. (1995) ‘Intellectual Property Protection and Antitrust in the Developing World: Crisis, Coercion, and

Choice’, International Organization 49(02), 315–349.

Shaffer E.R. and Brenner J.E. (2009) ‘A Trade Agreement’s Impact On Access To Generic Drugs’, Health Affairs

28(5), w957–w968.

Sharman J. (2008) ‘Power and Discourse in Policy Diffusion: Anti-Money Laundering in Developing States’,

International Studies Quarterly 52(3), 635–656.

Shipan C.R. and Volden C. (2006) ‘Bottom-Up Federalism: The Diffusion of Antismoking Policies from U.S. Cities to

States’, American Journal of Political Science 50(4), 825–843.

Shipan C.R. and Volden C. (2008) ‘The Mechanisms of Policy Diffusion’, American Journal of Political Science

52(4), 840–857.

Shipan C.R. and Volden C. (2012) ‘Policy Diffusion: Seven Lessons for Scholars and Practitioners’, Public

Administration Review 72(6), 788–796.

Simmons B.A. (2009) Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic Politics. Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge, NY.

Simmons B.A., Dobbin F. and Garrett G. (2006) ‘Introduction: The International Diffusion of Liberalism’,

International Organization 60(4), 781–810.

Simmons B.A., Dobbin F. and Garrett G. (2008) The Global Diffusion of Markets and Democracy. Cambridge

University Press, New York.

Simmons B.A. and Elkins Z. (2004) ‘The Globalization of Liberalization: Policy Diffusion in the International

Political Economy’, The American Political Science Review 98(1), 171–189.

Solıs M., Stallings B. and Katada S.N. (2009) Competitive Regionalism: FTA Diffusion in the Paciﬁc Rim,

International Political Economy Series. Palgrave Macmillan Basingstoke [England], New York.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

25

Gabriel J. Michael

International Coercion and Data Protection

Soule S.A. (1999) ‘The Diffusion of an Unsuccessful Innovation’, The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political

and Social Science 566(1), 120–131.

Stone D. (2004) ‘Transfer Agents and Global Networks in the ‘Transnationalization’ of Policy’, Journal of European

Public Policy 11(3), 545–566.

Sugiyama N.B. (2008) ‘Theories of Policy Diffusion: Social Sector Reform in Brazil’, Comparative Political Studies

41(2), 193–216.

Tucker J.A., Stoutenborough J.W. and Beverlin R.M. (2012) ‘Geographic Proximity in the Diffusion of Concealed

Weapons Permit Laws’, Politics & Policy 40(6), 1081–1105.

United States Trade Representative. (2005) Statement of Why the United State-Oman Free Trade Agreement is in the
Interest of U.S. Commerce [online]. Available at <http://www.ustr.gov/webfm_send/2650> [Accessed
September 2014].

United States Trade Representative. (2009) Final Text of the U.S.-Oman FTA [online]. Available on <http://www.

ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements/oman-fta/ﬁnal-text> [Accessed September 2014].

United States Trade Representative. (2014) Intellectual Property [online]. Available on <http://www.ustr.gov/trade-

topics/intellectual-property> [Accessed September 2014].

U.S. Department of State. (2003) ‘Eleven Exchange Visitor Alumni Appointed Members Of The New Senate’,

03AMMAN7526, Wikileaks, Embassy Amman (Jordan).

U.S. Department of State. (2004) ‘Jordan FDA Decision On Osteoporosis Drug Generic Raises IPR Concerns’,

04AMMAN725, Wikileaks, Embassy Amman (Jordan).

U.S. Department of State. (2005a) ‘2004 Special 301 Review For Slovakia’, 05BRATISLAVA161, Wikileaks,

Embassy Bratislava (Slovakia).

U.S. Department of State. (2005b) ‘Peru’s IPR Negotiator Resigns, But Then Stays On’, 05LIMA1092, Wikileaks,

Embassy Lima (Peru).

U.S. Department of State. (2006a) ‘Hikma Pharmaceuticals Showcases Another Growing Sector In Jordan’,

06AMMAN2648, Wikileaks, Embassy Amman (Jordan).

U.S. Department of State. (2006b) ‘Peruvian Pharmaceutical Industry In Favor Of FTA’, 06LIMA2264, Wikileaks,

Embassy Lima (Peru).

U.S. Department of State. (2006c) ‘Special 301 Recommendation For Hong Kong’, 06HONGKONG715, Wikileaks,

Consulate Hong Kong (China).

U.S. Department of State. (2007a) ‘Minister Hopeful Of October Implementation Of FTA’, 07MUSCAT774,

Wikileaks, Embassy Muscat (Oman).

U.S. Department of State. (2007b) ‘Oman Response To 2007 Special 301 Review’, 07MUSCAT189, Wikileaks,

Embassy Muscat (Oman).

U.S. Department of State. (2007c) ‘Oman’s Commerce Minister Reafﬁrms Drive Toward FTA', 07MUSCAT850,

Wikileaks, Embassy Muscat (Oman).

U.S. Department of State. (2007d) ‘Poland: Pharmacuetical Data Exclusivity Update’, 07WARSAW595, Wikileaks,

Embassy Warsaw (Poland).

U.S. Department of State. (2008a) ‘Embassy Muscat Nomination Of Brian Grimm For Herbert Salzman Award’,

08MUSCAT333, Wikileaks, Embassy Muscat (Oman).

U.S. Department of State. (2008b) ‘Oman Response To Special 301 Review’, 08MUSCAT152, Wikileaks, Embassy

Muscat (Oman).

U.S. Department of State. (2009) ‘Saudi Commerce Ministry Eager For Data Exclusivity Best Practices’,

09RIYADH1634 Embassy Riyadh (Saudi Arabia): Wikileaks.

Volden C. (2006) ‘States as Policy Laboratories: Emulating Success in the Children’s Health Insurance Program’,

American Journal of Political Science 50(2), 294–312.

Vreeland J.R. (2003) The IMF and Economic Development. Cambridge University Press, New York.

26

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

International Coercion and Data Protection

Gabriel J. Michael

Weidmann N.B., Kuse D. and Gleditsch K.S. (2010) ‘The Geography of the International System: The CShapes

Dataset’, International Interactions 36(1), 86–106.

Weiswasser E.S. and Danzis S.D. (2003) ‘The Hatch-Waxman Act: History, Structure, and Legacy’, Antitrust Law

Journal 71, 585.

Weyland K. (2005) ‘Theories of Policy Diffusion: Lessons from Latin American Pension Reform’, World Politics

57(2), 262–295.

Weyland K.G. (2006) Bounded Rationality and Policy Diffusion: Social Sector Reform in Latin America. Princeton

University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Whang T., McLean E.V. and Kuberski D.W. (2013) ‘Coercion, Information, and the Success of Sanction Threats’,

American Journal of Political Science 57(1), 65–81.

World Bank. (2014) Data [online]. Available at <http://data.worldbank.org/> [Accessed September 2014].
World Intellectual Property Organization. (2000) Oman: Law on Trade Marks, Descriptions and Secrets and
Protection from Unfair Competition (Promulgated by the Royal Decree No. 38/2000) [online]. Available at
<http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.jsp?id=3379> [Accessed September 2013].

World Intellectual Property Organization. (2005) Information on WIPO’s Development Cooperation Activities,

WIPO/EDS/INF/1 Rev. World Intellectual Property Organization, Geneva.

World Intellectual Property Organization. (2008) Oman: Industrial Property Rights and their Enforcement for the
Sultanate of Oman (Royal Decree No. 67/2008) [online]. Available at <http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/details.
jsp?id=5836> [Accessed September 2013].

World Intellectual Property Organization. (2014a) Statistics on Patents [online]. Available at <http://www.wipo.int/

ipstats/en/statistics/patents/> [Accessed September 2014].

World Intellectual Property Organization. (2014b) Technical Assistance Database [online]. Available at <http://

www.wipo.int/tad/en/> [Accessed September 2014].

World Intellectual Property Organization. (2014c) WIPO Intellectual Property Laws and Treaties Database (WIPO
Lex) [online]. Available at <http://www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/index.jsp?tab=3> [Accessed September 2014].
World Trade Organization. (2014a) Accession Commitments Database (ACDB) [online]. Available at <http://acdb.

wto.org/> [Accessed September 2014].

World Trade Organization. (2014b) Understanding the WTO Members [online]. Available at <http://www.wto.org/

english/thewto\_e/whatis\_e/tif\_e/org6\_e.htm> [Accessed September 2014].

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The  (2016) Vol. 19, no. 1–2

27


