The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 296–320

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2008.00345.x

Interoperability and Other Issues at the
IP–Anti-trust Interface: The EU Microsoft
Case

Dr Duncan Curley
Innovate Legal

The judgment in 2007 of the Court of First Instance in Microsoft Corporation v European
Commission was the culmination of one of the biggest anti-trust battles ever to have taken
place in the European Union. Although most aspects of the European Commission’s original
decision of 2004 were upheld, the Microsoft case remains interesting at several levels. The
judgment deals with the question of when it is permissible, in the public interest, to encroach
upon the exclusivity of intellectual property rights-holders, by requiring the grant of licences
to third parties seeking to enter or remain on the market. The case provides an illustration of
Community policy objectives being implemented through the medium of the competition
rules, namely the opening up of the software industry to more competition and the
encouragement of innovation in information technology. It also provides an illustration of
differing attitudes to the anti-trust regulation of unilateral conduct by companies with a
dominant market position in Europe and the United States.

Keywords Software; European Union; competition; compulsory licences

The decision of the Court of First Instance (CFI) in Microsoft Corporation v
Commission of the European Communities of 17 September 2007 (the Microsoft
case)1 effectively marked the beginning of the end2 of one of the biggest anti-trust
battles ever to have taken place in the European Union (EU). Although the CFI
upheld most aspects of the European Commission’s original decision of 20043 in
which Microsoft Corp. (Microsoft) was ﬁned h497 million for abusing its dominant
position on the market for personal computer (PC) operating systems, contrary to
article 82 of the Treaty establishing the European Community (the EC Treaty),4 the
Microsoft case remains interesting at several levels. It addresses the question of
when it is permissible, in the public interest, to encroach upon the exclusivity of
owners of intellectual property (IP) rights, by requiring the grant of licences to third
parties seeking to enter or remain on the market, with the CFI’s judgment providing
the ﬁrst application of the compulsory licensing criteria laid down in the European
Court of Justice’s decisions in Joined Cases C-241/91 P and C-242/91 P RTE and
ITP v Commission (Magill)5 and Case C-418/01 (IMS Health).6 It provides an
illustration of two Community policy objectives being implemented through the
medium of the competition rules, namely the opening up of the software industry to
more competition and the encouragement of innovation in information technology
(IT). Finally, the CFI’s judgment provides an illustration of the different attitudes

296

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

to the regulation of unilateral conduct by dominant ﬁrms in the EU and the United
States.

The Industry Setting

The Microsoft case has provided a focal point for the ongoing debate about the
future direction of the software business.7 For many years, proprietary software
developed inside specialist software houses held sway. In the EU, proprietary
software is primarily protected against unlicensed reproduction by means of copy-
right. Proprietary software is usually made available to purchasers under licence,
for a fee, and only in object code form.

By the 1980s, almost all software was proprietary but then came open source
and the concept of ‘‘free software’’,8 such as the Linux operating system. Advocates
of open source claim that the ability of anyone to be able to access the source code
of computer software and make modiﬁcations (in return for making those mod-
iﬁcations available to other users) facilitates innovation by means of collaborative
engagement. Open source software development has become increasingly commer-
cial in recent years and the growth in open source software revenue streams has
been signiﬁcant, with one estimate placing Linux-related revenues at almost
$37 billion by 2008 (Mahony and Naughton, 2004). However, open source software
may need to be customized before it can be installed and integrated with existing
computer hardware and software. For the protagonists of open source, an
important issue in breaking into the mainstream of acceptability for high-end
commercial software applications is interoperability with proprietary systems
(Buono and Sieverding, 2007).

Network Computing and Interoperability

Network computing is an inescapable feature of modern ofﬁce life. As such, it is big
business. The powerful computers that organize and manage communications
between users of PCs in both large and small organizations are called servers. A
server typically includes both hardware devices and software, such as an operating
system. It is critical in any computer network that a PC and a server can work
effectively together. Interoperability is a term that is used to describe effective
communication within a computer network. Yet this is not quite the full story,
because interoperability is a matter of degree. As one industry expert puts it:

Not everyone needs to have William Shakespeare’s command of the
English language in order to communicate with others in English. One
can get by in a foreign country with just a few words and phrases. The
same is true in technology, where sufﬁcient levels of interoperability can
be achieved without one program being able to take advantage of every
feature in the other (Zuck, 2005).

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

297

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

In other words, interoperability implies an ability to communicate and share
data, but it does not necessarily imply complete compatibility (Buono, 2005). The
degree of interoperability between products sold by different vendors (multi-vendor
interoperability) is clearly important when businesses come to make their purchas-
ing decisions for servers for their computer network.

Within the software industry, interoperability is usually effected in one of three
ways: by means of direct access to interface information (e.g. by means of a licence),
open standards or reverse engineering. The licensing business model is one that has
been adopted by Microsoft and it has embarked on a strategy of expansion of its IP
portfolio with the intention of driving revenues from licensing (Marsland, 2003).
Open standards consist of published hardware or software speciﬁcations that are
developed by organizations in which companies participate on a consensual basis.
IBM has, for example, pledged publicly that its patents may be used to create
open standards (Kappos and Strimaitis, 2006). As far as reverse engineering goes, in
the EU, there is a limited right for software developers lawfully to decompile a
computer program, with a view to effecting interoperability, without
in-
fringing copyright. This right is enshrined in Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14
May 1991 on the legal protection of computer programs (the Software Copyright
Directive).

The IP–Anti-trust Interface

The EU competition rules are intended to preserve the functioning of the free
market economy. A speciﬁc policy objective within this overall framework is to
preserve a competitive market structure for innovation, by ensuring that the
number of players investing in a particular technological area is not restricted
(Kairo and Paulweber, 2001). IP rights such as patents, copyright and trademarks
are monopoly rights conferred by the state as a reward for innovation and
creativity. Patents,
in particular, may be used to restrict access to superior
technology so that an above-market premium can be earned by the patent-owning
ﬁrm. Ownership of superior technology and associated IP rights may thus give
certain ﬁrms (undertakings, in the language of the EU competition rules) the power
to price products above the prevailing market rate. Yet when such companies
possess signiﬁcant shares of EU markets, their business decisions may engage the
competition rules, speciﬁcally article 82 of the EC Treaty. One of the difﬁcult
questions facing IP and competition policy makers is how to balance the degree of
monopoly protection given by IP rights to inventors and artists, on the one
hand, against the desirability of maintaining open and competitive markets, on
the other (Curley, 2006). The clash between the desire to reward creativity and
inventive activity with copyright and patents and the EU policy imperative to
foster innovation by means of open and dynamic markets is encapsulated in
the battle between the various software industry protagonists in the Microsoft
case.

298

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

The EU Competition Rules: Articles 81 and 82

The main European competition rules are laid down in articles 81 and 82 of the EC
Treaty.9 The two provisions can affect IP rights-holders in different ways. Article 81
is primarily aimed at cartels and other anti-competitive, joint behaviour, but it can
catch all kinds of agreements and business transactions entered into by companies.
Article 81(1)(b) expressly prohibits agreements between companies that limit or
control ‘‘production, markets, technical development or investment’’.

Article 81 regulates two of the main methods of achieving interoperability:
software licences and standards. Software copyright licence agreements are among
the commercial arrangements that can beneﬁt from an automatic exemption from
the prohibition in article 81, by virtue of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 772/
2004, known as the Technology Transfer Block Exemption Regulation or the
TTBER, which came into force at the end of April 2004 (Curley and Garrod, 2004).
A detailed set of guidelines on the effect of the competition rules on technology
licensing agreements was published by the European Commission at the same
time.10 Agreements that establish patent pools and standard-setting organizations
are not covered by the TTBER, but there is a helpful section in the guidelines that
indicates how the Commission will assess the pro-competitive beneﬁts of such
arrangements.11 Both the TTBER and the guidelines contain concrete embodiments
of the European Commission’s policy of endeavouring to preserve competition in
innovation, by maintaining the capacity for technological development to be
conducted in a number of ﬁrms, rather than allowing technology (and IP) to
become concentrated in the hands of a few (Curley, 2004).

Article 82 prohibits undertakings with a dominant position on a particular
market from conducting themselves in a way that constitutes an abuse of their
market power. It is aimed at unilateral conduct by dominant ﬁrms with substantial
market shares. Article 82(b) speciﬁcally lists the limiting of production, markets or
technical development to the detriment of consumers as ways in which a dominant
position may be abused.

Article 82—Special Responsibility

Underlying article 82 is the assumption that the behaviour of monopolists should be
subject to clear and strict competition rules, based on the premise that the mere
presence of a dominant undertaking on the market has already weakened the
competitive process and reduced the economic freedom of other undertakings, to
the detriment of consumers.12 Where there is only one dominant undertaking on a
market with several smaller, fragmented players, article 82 imposes strictures on the
way in which the dominant ﬁrm may conduct itself, with the aim of maintaining
what little competition remains on a market that is dominated by one main player.
Article 82 thus applies only where a company has a dominant position on a
relevant market. When conducting market investigations under article 82, the
European Commission usually deﬁnes the relevant market and then determines

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

299

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

whether a company is in fact dominant on that market. It often uses market shares
as the most important factor in deciding whether an undertaking is dominant, large
market shares being regarded as prima facie evidence of the existence of dominance.
The text of article 82 is as follows:

Any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the
common market or in a substantial part of it shall be prohibited as incompatible
with the common market in so far as it may affect trade between Member States.
Such abuse may, in particular, consist in:

(a) directly or indirectly imposing unfair purchase or selling prices or other

unfair trading conditions;

(b) limiting production, markets or technical development to the detriment of

consumers;

(c) applying dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading

parties, thereby placing them at a competitive disadvantage;

(d) making the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other parties

of supplementary obligations which, by their nature or according to
commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such contracts.

An undertaking acting abusively may be able to escape liability for a breach of
Article 82 if it can show an objective justiﬁcation for its conduct.

Commission v Microsoft (the Commission Decision)

The Decision of 24 March 2004
Central to the EU case (and the notorious US anti-trust case13) was Microsoft’s
very strong position on the market for PC operating systems. These deal with
routine computing tasks such as memory allocation and controlling the operations
of peripherals. Microsoft had—and continues to have—a very large market share
of new PC operating system licences, with over 90% of the market since 2000.14
The Windows operating system has of course become the de facto standard for
most PCs. The fact that Windows is ubiquitous undoubtedly confers upon
Microsoft signiﬁcant market power, but arguably consumers also beneﬁt, because
they get access to many different kinds of application software that have been
written by software designers speciﬁcally to interface with the Windows operating
system.

Windows Media Player—the Tying Abuse
According to the Commission, Microsoft had abused its dominant position on the
PC operating systems market by integrating (or bundling) its Windows Media
Player into its Windows operating system. This was categorized (in legal terms) by
the Commission as a ‘‘tying’’ abuse under article 82(d), i.e. the allegation was that
Microsoft was making the availability of the Windows PC operating system
conditional upon the simultaneous acquisition of Windows Media Player. The
Commission claimed that if this practice was allowed to continue, it would lead to

300

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

the progressive elimination of rival media players, because producers of compatible
software and content knew that if they based their products on Microsoft’s
Windows Media Player technology—rather than on competing technology—they
would be able to reach almost all PC users. This would eventually lead to all
consumers preferring Windows Media Player to other media players.

The remedy ordered by the Commission in this part of the case was to force
Microsoft to offer its Windows PC operating system without a media player. This
remedy was in itself a source of considerable debate (see, e.g., Dolmans and Graf,
2004; K ¨uhn et al., 2005), but it will not be addressed further in this article, save to
note that by the time of its appeal, Microsoft had already complied with this part of
the Commission’s original decision.15 Before the CFI, Microsoft alleged that the
Commission was forcing it to offer to consumers what was essentially a degraded
version of its Windows PC operating system, but the CFI rejected this argument
and upheld the remedy.

Work Group Server Operating Systems—the Leveraging Abuse

The interoperability part of the case concerned servers. At issue in the case were
smaller servers that carry out basic tasks such as the management of communication
between a network of PC users. The Commission referred to these as work group
servers in its decision.16 In 1998, Sun Microsystems Inc. (Sun) had asked Microsoft
to disclose interoperability information to allow Sun to make work group server
operating systems that were compatible with the Windows environment and that
could compete effectively with Microsoft’s Windows work group server operating
systems. Microsoft refused. Sun complained to the European Commission.

The Commission investigated. It found that the proper functioning of a work
group of PC users using Windows relied upon a technical architecture of client-to-
server and server-to-server interconnections and interactions. The prevalence of the
Windows operating system on the PCs of many work group networks gave
Microsoft an in-built advantage over its competitors in the market for work group
server operating systems, because it was in the best position to engineer the most
efﬁcient server software that could interact with Windows operating system soft-
ware installed on most PCs. The Commission concluded that interoperability
information was needed by those competitors of Microsoft that wanted to develop
work group server operating systems that could function effectively within a
network of PCs running a Windows PC operating system.

The Commission found as a matter of fact that reverse engineering of Windows
was not viable. It examined the public availability of interface information, such as
the disclosures made by Microsoft in compliance with its obligations under the
settlement of the US anti-trust litigation.17 These disclosures were made by Micro-
soft pursuant to its Communications Protocols Licensing Program, which began in
September 2002.18 However, as the Commission pointed out in its decision,19 the
information licensed under this program was limited to client-to-server communica-

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

301

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

tion protocols and not server-to-server protocols. The terms of the licence agreement
offered by Microsoft speciﬁcally exclude any use of the communications protocols
for server-to-server communications. Thus, the interoperability information that
companies such as Sun needed was only available from one source—Microsoft.

The Commission surmised that the close compatibility of PCs running a
Windows operating system and work group servers also running a Windows
operating system enabled Microsoft to lock the market into a homogenous,
Microsoft solution. In addition, an important component of the Commission’s
case was Microsoft’s previous conduct, in entering the market for group server
operating systems, then building up its market share and altering its conduct viz. its
competitors. Vendors of the Unix operating system and Novell Inc. (Novell) were
the ﬁrst on the market for work group server operating systems in the 1980s, when
computing networks were built with non-Microsoft work group servers. In the early
1990s, when Microsoft did not have an alternative work group server operating
system,
it therefore had incentives to have its Windows PC operating system
interoperate with non-Microsoft work group server operating systems. To this
end, Microsoft had disclosed interoperability information, licensing, for example,
Digital Equipment Corporation in 1995. However, according to the Commission,
once Microsoft’s work group server operating system had gained acceptance in the
market, Microsoft’s policy changed. It began to withhold interoperability informa-
tion, rather than share it.

By the time of the Commission’s decision, Microsoft’s share of the work group
server operating systems market was at least 60%.20 Because of its dominant position
on this market and its overwhelming dominance on the market for PC operating
systems, Microsoft’s refusal to supply interoperability information to Sun was an
abrogation of its special responsibility under article 82 not to endanger an already-
fragile state of competition on the market for work group server operating systems.
This meant that Microsoft had infringed article 82. Furthermore, the Commission
concluded that the only viable means for others to achieve interoperability with
Windows required Microsoft to provide interoperability information directly to its
competitors, under licence. By way of remedy, the Commission therefore ordered
Microsoft to disclose complete and accurate speciﬁcations of the communication
protocols necessary for Microsoft’s competitors to be able to make work server
operating systems that could interface properly with Windows-operated PCs. The
decision reﬂects the Commission’s policy (seen in other areas of competition law and
in the Software Copyright Directive) that technical development is best promoted by
a number of different ﬁrms innovating, rather than one (Anderman, 2004).

Interoperability Information

One of the main issues in the Microsoft case was the question of the scope of the
Commission’s order and what was actually meant by interoperability information.
The term interoperability has of course already been the subject of controversy in

302

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

the EU in recent years; lack of agreement on the interoperability provisions in the
proposed Computer-Implemented Inventions Directive21 was part of the reason
why that draft directive was rejected by MEPs in 2005.

The Commission claimed that it had required Microsoft to disclose interoper-
ability information as deﬁned in the Software Copyright Directive, where, in recital
12, the word ‘‘interoperability’’ is said to mean ‘‘the ability [of two software
programs] to exchange information and mutually to use the information which
has been exchanged’’, i.e. multivendor interoperability. The actual wording in the
Commission’s decision is as follows: ‘‘interoperability information’’ consists of the
‘‘complete and accurate speciﬁcations for all the [communications] protocols
implemented in Windows work group server operating systems and . . . used by
Windows work group servers to deliver ﬁle and print services and group and user
administrative services . . . to Windows work group networks’’.22

Microsoft claimed that the Commission was in fact demanding something more
than simply a guaranteed ability to communicate and share data. The speciﬁcations
for Microsoft’s communication protocols were detailed descriptions of the design
and operation of those protocols that would allow a competitor to use them in its
own server operating systems. Microsoft claimed that if it was forced to license its
communications protocols as the Commission envisaged, the end result would not
be competition, but instead the development of ‘‘clones’’ of Microsoft work group
servers with perfect substitutability (or ‘‘plug replaceability’’) for a Windows-based
server operating system. Microsoft conceded that there was a minimum level of
interoperability with Windows that was required for effective competition, but it
said that this level was not difﬁcult to achieve, technically. A large section of the
technical debate in the investigative procedure was taken up by this question of
whether the Commission’s remedy would allow Microsoft’s competitors simply to
‘‘clone’’ its Windows products.

The Software Copyright Directive

Article 6 of the Software Copyright Directive makes lawful the act of decompiling
computer software (reverse engineering) in order to enable an independent pro-
grammer to ensure that a new computer program can interoperate with an original
software program. This may be necessary where, for example, information on
interfaces is not made available by an owner of proprietary software: ‘‘Article 6 . . .
permits reverse engineering in order to access the interfaces which are needed to
support the functionality designed in an independently created program’’ (Hart,
2006). However, article 6 is quite restrictive, because any such reverse engineering
must be for the narrow purpose of obtaining interface information that is necessary
to achieve interoperability; it does not permit a software programmer to obtain
interface information that is not relevant to that task.

The restrictive nature of article 6 arises because of the obligations of the EU
member states under article 9(2) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

303

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Literary and Artistic Works (the Berne Convention),23 dealing with the right of
reproduction of copyright works. It will be recalled that article 9(1) of the Berne
Convention provides that authors of literary works (including computer programs)
shall have the exclusive right of authorizing the reproduction of such works, in any
manner or form (emphasis added). Article 9(2) contains a limited derogation from the
broad scope of the exclusive right, in that ‘‘It shall be a matter for legislation in the
countries of the Union to permit the reproduction of such works in certain special
cases, provided that such reproduction does not conﬂict with a normal exploitation of
the work and does not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the author’’.
The limited right of decompilation provided in article 6 of the Software Copyright
Directive is intended to be in accordance with these Berne Convention obligations
(Czarnota and Hart, 1991). However, it transpired that the argument between the
Commission and Microsoft about the correspondence between ‘‘interoperability’’ as
deﬁned in the Software Copyright Directive and the degree of interoperability sought
by the Commission was something of an unnecessary sideshow.

The CFI’s Decision on Interoperability

Before the CFI, the Commission maintained that it had not ﬁxed the interoperability
that was required for effective competition at a given level. It said that it had
established as a matter of fact that the degree of interoperability with Windows that
Microsoft’s competitors could achieve (e.g. using reverse engineering) was simply too
low to enable them to remain viably on the market. The purpose of its remedy was
therefore to make available information that would allow Microsoft’s competitors to
engineer an equivalent degree of interoperability to that achieved by Microsoft, but by
means of their own innovative efforts, so that when a server running a non-Microsoft
work group server operating system is installed on a Windows-based work group
server network, it would be capable, inter alia, of delivering all of its functionalities to
client PCs running Windows. The remedy was not intended to allow Microsoft’s
competitors to produce clones; it was intended to enable competing products with
‘‘added value’’ to be created that would function differently to Windows.

The CFI agreed with the Commission’s assessment of the facts. In doing so, it
sought to rise above the arguments as to whether the ‘‘interoperability’’ sought by
the Commission was the same as or consistent with ‘‘interoperability’’ as deﬁned in
the Software Copyright Directive. The CFI ruled that what was in issue was a
decision adopted by the Commission in application of article 82, a provision that
was of higher rank than the Software Copyright Directive. The question for
determination was actually whether the Commission had correctly determined the
degree of interoperability that should be attainable in light of the objectives of article
82.24 The CFI concluded that it had.

Microsoft’s IP

Microsoft claimed that it had invested many years of research and development in
designing communications protocols that were useful in terms of functionality and

304

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

which enhanced the speed, reliability, security and efﬁciency of interactions between
Windows operating systems. The communication protocols and the speciﬁcations
describing them were protected by various IP rights, including copyright and
patents. In addition, they constituted valuable conﬁdential information that could
be protected against unauthorized disclosure by the law of trade secrets in various
member states.

One of Microsoft’s arguments against the Commission’s disclosure order was to
point out that the remedy rode roughshod over Microsoft’s IP rights, a serious
matter in relation to which there is existing EU jurisprudence. Microsoft claimed
that the Commission had not satisﬁed the requirements set down in the existing cases
on article 82 and the compulsory licensing of IP rights. It accused the Commission
publicly of ‘‘the biggest encroachment on intellectual property in European compe-
tition law history’’ and likened the Commission’s disclosure remedy to ‘‘opening the
vaults of a bank’’ and ‘‘handing out money to passers-by’’.25

The Commission had initially seemed sceptical about the IP rights that
Microsoft claimed were relevant. In a footnote to the original decision,26 it had
conceded that the speciﬁcations might constitute information that was prima facie
protectable by Microsoft as trade secrets. The Commission had also acknowledged
that if it ordered Microsoft to disclose interoperability information to its compe-
titors (such as Sun) for the purpose of allowing them to produce rival work group
server operating systems, this might constitute compulsory licensing of Microsoft’s
IP rights.

On 30 September 2004, some 6 months after the Commission’s decision, there
was a hearing before the president of the CFI on Microsoft’s application to suspend
the operative parts of the Commission’s order, pending the CFI’s substantive ruling
on Microsoft’s appeal. The application was subsequently turned down,27 but
Microsoft took the opportunity to beef up its case with additional details about
the IP rights that would become the subject of compulsory licensing,
if the
Commission’s disclosure remedy was upheld. Microsoft’s communication protocols
attract copyright (when expressed) and the written speciﬁcations for those protocols
are preparatory design materials that also qualify for copyright protection, pur-
suant to article 1(1) of the Software Copyright Directive.28 Like any copyright
owner, Microsoft has the exclusive right to authorize the publication of its protected
work. The Commission’s remedy would of course deprive Microsoft of the right to
decide whether, and if so in what form, when and on what conditions, it could
license the speciﬁcations. In addition, because the purpose of the Commission’s
order was to permit Microsoft’s competitors to adapt the speciﬁcations disclosed to
them for the purpose of developing rival products that could interoperate with
Windows, the remedy would deprive Microsoft of its exclusive right to authorize the
creation of derivative works.

In relation to patents, the position was somewhat less clear, but Microsoft
claimed that it had a large number of patents and patent applications that would
cover various aspects of the implementation of the communications protocols for

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

305

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Windows client PC and server operating systems.29 Patented technology was not
excluded from the Commission’s remedy and Microsoft asserted that such technol-
ogy would have to be made the subject of a compulsory patent licence, if the
Commission’s remedy was made effective. Microsoft also observed (at the interim
measures hearing) that the effect of the proposed remedy was not limited in time, so
that future patents granted to Microsoft would eventually be covered by the
compulsory licensing requirement.

Finally, Microsoft claimed that its communication protocols constituted valu-
able technical interoperability information that Microsoft was prima facie entitled
to keep secret. Before the CFI, the Commission vigorously disputed the value of the
information that Microsoft sought to protect. It also rejected Microsoft’s assertion
that the communication protocols were innovative and it put in evidence claiming
that the relevant interoperability information did not include ‘‘any intrinsically
valuable invention’’. In relation to copyright, the Commission observed that the
fact that the speciﬁcations were protected by copyright was ‘‘purely incidental’’
because the remedy imposed upon Microsoft by the Commission’s order obviously
required it to draft a document.

Although both sides spent a great deal of time in argument about these issues
before the CFI, the court deftly avoided the need to determine whether—in fact—
Microsoft had IP rights that would need to be the subject of a compulsory licence.
The CFI noted that the Commission had adopted its decision on the assumption
that Microsoft was the proprietor of relevant IP rights. The CFI conﬁrmed the
correctness of this approach. The court was content to proceed on the assumption
that the high water mark of Microsoft’s case on IP rights was proved, i.e. that the
communication protocols (or the speciﬁcations of those protocols) were protected
by IP rights and/or could be treated as trade secrets.30 The CFI observed that the
real question to be resolved in the case was whether the jurisprudential conditions
upon which a dominant undertaking may be required to grant a licence of its IP
rights had been made out.31

The Jurisprudence on Compulsory Licensing

Decisions ordering the compulsory licensing of IP rights as a remedy for breach of
competition law have been few and far between in the EU. The compulsory
licensing remedy developed out of a line of article 82 cases concerned with refusals
to deal by a dominant company with a weaker competitor. The line of cases starts
with the 1974 judgment of the European Court of Justice in the case of Commercial
Solvents v Commission.32 In brief, Commercial Solvents was the dominant supplier
of a raw material used in the manufacture of a drug to treat tuberculosis. After a
period of supplying the raw material to Zoja—a company that was active in the
downstream market for the drug—supplies were unilaterally terminated, because
Commercial Solvents decided that it wanted to supply the drug itself. The
Commission decreed that Commercial Solvents had abused its dominant market

306

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

position under article 82, by refusing to supply Zoja. It ordered the resumption of
supplies of the raw material. This decision was upheld by the Court of Justice on
appeal.

In 1988, the Court of Justice considered a refusal to license IP rights in the
context of article 82, in the case of Volvo v Veng.33 Volvo had alleged that the
importation and sale in the United Kingdom by Veng of front wing components for
Volvo cars infringed Volvo’s UK-registered design. Veng alleged that Volvo was
abusing its dominant position on the market for spare parts by refusing to grant
Veng a licence of its IP that would enable Veng to sell the car components in the
United Kingdom lawfully. The Court of Justice held that any obligation imposed by
competition law on the owner of an IP right to grant a licence would take away the
very substance of the exclusive monopoly right. The court did however say that the
exercise of an exclusive right by the proprietor of an IP right could offend against
article 82, if the dominant undertaking had carried out other culpable acts in
addition to the refusal to license, such as (for example) the ﬁxing of prices for spare
parts at an unfair level. The conclusion that was drawn from this case was that if a
dominant company owns IP rights that enable it to prevent third parties from
producing directly competing products, it was not an abuse per se for it to refuse to
grant licences. Dominant undertakings would only commit an abuse of a dominant
position within the meaning of article 82 by refusing to license their IP rights, if they
did something more than merely exercise their legal rights to prevent their monopoly
rights from being infringed.

Magill

The ﬁrst case in which IP rights were the subject of a compulsory licence ordered
under the competition rules was the Magill decision. Mr Magill wished to publish a
composite television (TV) programme guide for Irish viewers. Up until that point,
consumers had had to buy separate guides for each TV channel. The Irish broad-
casters sued Mr Magill for infringement of copyright subsisting in the list of TV
programmes contained in their individual guides.

On appeal, the Court of Justice conﬁrmed that each broadcaster was dominant
in the market for TV scheduling information and the refusal of the broadcasters to
license Mr Magill infringed article 82. In particular, the Court of Justice held that
the exercise of an exclusive right such as copyright may in exceptional circumstances
infringe article 82. The exceptional circumstances in this case included the fact, ﬁrst,
that the refusal concerned a product (the weekly TV listings), the supply of which
was indispensable to the proposed activity by Mr Magill, namely the publication of a
composite TV guide. Second, the TV companies’ refusal prevented the launch of a
new product, which the TV companies did not offer and for which there was proven
consumer demand. Third, the refusal was not objectively justiﬁed. Fourth, the TV
companies had effectively reserved to themselves a secondary market—the market
for TV guides—by excluding all competition on that market.

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

307

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

IMS Health

In the IMS Health case, the issue was whether, in the circumstances of the case, an
abuse had been committed when a dominant undertaking (IMS Health) had refused
a licence to its weaker competitor (NDC) to use a database in which copyright
subsisted. IMS Health sued NDC, then a new entrant onto the market for German
pharmaceutical sales data, for copyright infringement. NDC asked IMS to grant it a
copyright licence, in exchange for payment, but IMS refused. The German court
decided to refer the question of whether IMS had the right to ﬁnal injunctive relief
under German copyright law, if the refusal by IMS to enter into a licence with NDC
on reasonable terms was abusive conduct within the meaning of article 82.34 The
Court of Justice stated that in order for the refusal of a copyright owner to give
access to a product or service that was indispensable for carrying on a particular
business to be abusive under article 82, three conditions must be satisﬁed:


the refusal must prevent the emergence of a new product for which there is
potential consumer demand;
the refusal to license by the copyright owner must be unjustiﬁed, when examined
objectively;
the refusal must be such as to exclude any competition on a secondary market.





Since the decision in IMS Health, there has been considerable debate in the
literature about the meaning of the judgment and its implications for dominant
including the question as to whether IMS Health establishes an
companies,
exhaustive list of exceptional circumstances that must each be checked off in turn,
before the compulsory licensing remedy may be imposed. It has been observed that
the Court of Justice’s decision in IMS Health did not progress the understanding of
the case law much beyond what was stated in Magill (Meinberg, 2006). Commen-
tators have disagreed on how to reconcile the two cases, especially in the notional
scenario of a competitor seeking to bring to market not just a new product (as in
Magill) but a different product that infringes the IP rights of a dominant under-
taking, but for which nonetheless there is potential customer demand (see, e.g.,
Cook, 2004; Ong, 2004; Stothers, 2004; Temple Lang, 2004).

Application to Microsoft v Commission

Before the CFI, Microsoft maintained, inter alia, that none of the criteria set out in
the IMS Health case were satisﬁed. The Commission argued that it did not follow
from IMS Health that the circumstances in which compulsory licensing of inter-
operability information could be ordered should be assessed solely against the
conditions laid down in that case.35 The Commission maintained that in order to
determine whether a refusal to deal
it is necessary to take into
consideration all the particular circumstances surrounding that refusal, which need
not necessarily be the same as those identiﬁed in the previous cases.

is abusive,

308

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

According to the Commission, there were exceptional circumstances in the
Microsoft case that warranted a compulsory licence. These were as follows: ﬁrst, the
fact that the information was interoperability information, interoperability being ‘‘a
matter to which the Community legislature attaches particular importance’’;
second, Microsoft’s overwhelming dominance in the market for PC operating
systems and the use of its power on that market to eliminate competition on the
adjacent work group server operating systems market; third, Microsoft’s conduct in
initially making available interface information, establishing itself on the market
and then disrupting previous levels of supply by subsequently refusing to disclose
such information to its competitors (cf. Commercial Solvents).

Although the strict legal position can only be clariﬁed by a further ruling from
the Court of Justice, the CFI gave its opinion on the criteria set out in Magill and
IMS Health. It conﬁrmed that it is only in exceptional circumstances that the
exercise of an exclusive IP right may give rise to an abuse under article 82. The CFI
also conﬁrmed that the IMS Health conditions are cumulative so that, when found
together, they meet the exceptional circumstances criterion, as required by Magill.
The CFI came up with the following, combined reﬁnement of the requirements in
Magill and IMS Health: 36

Once it is established that the following set of circumstances prevail, the refusal by
the holder of a dominant position to grant a licence may infringe Article 82,
unless the refusal is objectively justiﬁed:

 the refusal must relate to a product or service indispensable to the exercise of a
particular activity on a neighbouring market;
 the refusal is of such a kind as to exclude any effective competition on that
neighbouring market;
 the refusal must prevent the appearance of a new product for which there is
potential consumer demand.

The CFI then proceeded to consider whether each of these circumstances was

present in the Microsoft case.

The Indispensable Nature of the Interoperability Information

Microsoft challenged the Commission’s ﬁnding that interoperability with the client
PC operating system was of signiﬁcant competitive importance in the market for
work group server operating systems. Noting that such factual questions were only
subject to limited review by the community courts, the CFI refuted this challenge.37
The court conﬁrmed the Commission’s conclusion that interoperability considera-
tions play a key role in consumers’ decisions about whether to purchase work group
server operating systems. It found that, in light of the privileged, technical links that
Microsoft had established between its Windows client PC and work group server
operating systems and the fact that Windows is present on virtually all client PCs

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

309

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

installed within organizations, Microsoft was able to impose the Windows domain
architecture as the de facto standard for work group computing. The consequence
of this was that interoperability with Windows was key to other work group server
operating systems, if they were to remain viably on the market.

The Risk of Elimination of Competition

Microsoft argued that the refusal to disclose interoperability information was not
such as to exclude all competition on a secondary market, in this case the market for
work group server operating systems. It noted that the Commission had based its
ﬁnding of a breach of article 82 on the mere risk of elimination of competition.
Microsoft claimed that in the cases dealing with compulsory licensing of IP rights,
the community courts had adopted a more stringent test, requiring a high
probability of effective competition being eliminated. Microsoft also claimed that
the perceived risk to competition elaborated by the Commission was contradicted
by the state of the market in the real world, since the refusal by Microsoft of Sun’s
request in 1998. Although 6 years had elapsed before the Commission issued its
decision in 2004, there were still numerous competitors on the market for work
group server operating systems, including IBM, Novell and Sun, not to mention the
emergence of Linux.

The CFI was robust in its dismissal of Microsoft’s arguments, particularly the
complaint about the alleged higher standard of proof for the elimination of
competition, which the court found to be ‘‘purely one of terminology and wholly
irrelevant’’.38 Having considered the factual evidence assembled by the Commission
during the investigative procedure, the CFI conﬁrmed the Commission’s ﬁnding
that Microsoft’s refusal to disclose interoperability information meant that its
competitors’ products were conﬁned to marginal market positions. The CFI
concluded that the fact that there was still marginal competition between operators
on the market did not vitiate the Commission’s ﬁnding that all effective competition
was at risk of being eliminated.39

The New Product Criterion

Arguably, one of the weaknesses in the Commission’s initial decision was that it did
not ﬁnd that Microsoft was suppressing a new product (as required by Magill)
by refusing to supply interoperability information. As Microsoft pointed out, there
were other work group server operating systems available on the market from
other vendors, such as Linux. Citing in particular the ﬁrst IMS Health criterion,
which states that a refusal must prevent the emergence of a new product for
which there is a potential consumer demand, Microsoft criticized the Commission’s
decision. It said that the Commission had failed to identify any new product
that Microsoft’s competitors would develop using the communications protocols,
nor had the decision identiﬁed any demand on the part of consumers for such
a product.

310

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

In an important section of its judgment, the CFI emphasized that whether
Microsoft’s conduct prevented the appearance of a new product fell to be assessed
under article 82(b), which prohibits abusive practices that consist of ‘‘limiting
production, markets or technical developments to the . . . prejudice of consumers’’.
It stated that:

The circumstance relating to the appearance of a new product [as
prefaced in Magill and IMS Health] cannot be the only parameter
which determines whether a refusal to license an intellectual property
right is capable of causing prejudice to consumers within the meaning of
Article 82(b). As that provision states, such prejudice may arise where
there is a limitation not only of production or markets, but also of
technical development.40

The Commission had found that Microsoft’s refusal to disclose interoperability
information put its competitors’ products at a disadvantage, particularly with
regard to properties such as security, reliability, ease of use or operating perfor-
mance speed. The CFI approved the Commission’s ﬁnding that if Microsoft’s
competitors had access to the interoperability information, they could use that
information to make advanced features of their own products available within a
Windows domain, thus facilitating technical development:

. . . the contested decision rests on the concept that, once the obstacle
represented for Microsoft’s competitors by the insufﬁcient degree of
interoperability with the Windows domain architecture has been
removed, those competitors will be able to offer work group server
operating systems which, far from merely reproducing the Windows
systems already on the market, will be distinguished from those systems
with respect to parameters which consumers consider important . . . .41

The CFI was not persuaded by Microsoft’s argument that no consumers had
actually complained that they had been forced to adopt a Windows work group
server operating system because of a lack of choice. The CFI made the point that
when customers were confronted with a choice as to whether to put up with
interoperability problems rendering their business processes cumbersome and
inefﬁcient, they were bound to opt for an alternative, homogenous Windows-based
solution for their work group network instead.42 The CFI noted that it was settled
law that article 82 covered not only practices that affect consumers directly, but also
those that indirectly affect consumers by impairing an effective competitive
structure.43

In conclusion, the CFI afﬁrmed the Commission’s ﬁnding that Microsoft’s
refusal to disclose interoperability information limited technical development to the
prejudice of consumers, contrary to article 82(b). Although the Commission had
not expressly dealt in its decision with the new product criterion in IMS Health, on
the basis that Microsoft’s refusal limited the technical development of new products

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

311

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

by its competitors, the CFI was content to ﬁnd that this criterion was indeed
satisﬁed.44

Objective Justiﬁcation

Incentives to Innovate
Microsoft argued that its conduct in refusing to supply interoperability information
was objectively justiﬁable. It held IP rights over the technology concerned and it
had made signiﬁcant investments in designing its communication protocols. If
Microsoft was forced to license out this interface information, it would take away
Microsoft’s own incentives to continue with further innovations in this area.

In coming to its initial decision, the Commission had focused on the effect of
Microsoft’s refusal to supply interoperability information on the overall level of
innovation in the software industry. The Commission alleged that the effect of
Microsoft’s refusal to supply the requisite information would be to force the market
to migrate towards an industry standard for work group server operating systems
based on Windows, thereby discouraging other companies from coming up with
innovative solutions of their own and limiting technical development to the
prejudice of consumers. In short, Microsoft’s refusal would adversely affect the
incentives of others to innovate and so prevent the emergence of new products in the
future. The Commission had concluded that by ordering disclosure, there would be
an overall positive effect on incentives to innovate in the rest of the industry, as well
as on Microsoft.45 These considerations outweighed the potential negative impact
of a compulsory licence on Microsoft’s own incentives to innovate.

The Commission’s ‘‘balancing’’ of incentives to innovate in its Microsoft
decision has been the subject of considerable discussion in the literature (K ¨uhn
and Van Reenen, 2007; L ´eveˆ que, 2005). This particular aspect of the decision was
vigorously attacked by Microsoft before the CFI as marking a radical departure
from the case law, asserting that the Commission’s ‘‘balancing test’’ was legally
defective, vague and could have unforeseen consequences. Microsoft contended
that the application of the test would have the effect of reducing the incentives of
dominant undertakings to invest in research and development, because they might
have to share the fruits of their efforts with others. It criticized the Commission for
making no attempt to quantify the negative impact of the compulsory licensing
remedy on Microsoft’s competitors, who (Microsoft said) would ‘‘wait and see’’
what technology they could obtain under licence, rather than developing their own
technology.

The CFI found that Microsoft had not sufﬁciently discharged its burden of
proof concerning the negative effects that would be caused by the disclosure
order.46 In this speciﬁc context, the CFI noted that it was normal practice in the
IT industry to disclose interface information to third parties to facilitate interoper-
ability between products. Furthermore, the disclosures made under the United
States settlement and the Microsoft Communications Protocols Licensing Program

312

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

(as regards client-to-server communication protocols) had had no discernible
negative impact on Microsoft’s incentives to innovate.47 In relation to the
controversial ‘‘balancing test’’, the CFI re-examined in careful detail the Commis-
sion’s original decision. It noted that the Commission had proceeded in accordance
with the case law, by ﬁrst establishing that the exceptional circumstances identiﬁed
by the Court of Justice in Magill and IMS Health were present. Having established
that there were indeed exceptional circumstances, the Commission had then,
correctly, moved on to consider whether the justiﬁcation put forward by Microsoft
for its conduct—the negative effect on its incentives to innovate—should,
objectively, prevail over the exceptional circumstances that the Commission had
identiﬁed.

The CFI conﬁrmed that the Commission’s conclusion (that Microsoft’s justi-
ﬁcation was inadequate) was soundly based, when judged objectively against a
range of criteria. These included the fact that the Commission had successfully
refuted Microsoft’s arguments about the cloning of its products, the fact that the
Commission had established that disclosure of interoperability information was
widespread in the software industry and also that a commitment made by IBM to
the Commission in 1984 was not substantially different from what Microsoft was
being obliged to do pursuant to the Commission’s order.48 The CFI was adamant
that the Commission had not employed a novel incentives to innovate ‘‘balancing
test’’ in this assessment. This seems to be a somewhat charitable reading of the
Commission’s decision, although the CFI was probably right in that the outcome of
the case did not depend upon the Commission’s application (or not) of this new test.
When scrutinized, Microsoft’s attempted justiﬁcation was simply too vague and
imprecise to outweigh the objective factual evidence that the Commission had
ranged against it.

Mandating Access: The Public Interest

The CFI ruled that the mere fact that Microsoft’s communication protocols (or the
speciﬁcations for those protocols) were covered by IP rights could not be an
objective justiﬁcation within the meaning of IMS Health. The court pointed
out that Microsoft’s argument was ‘‘inconsistent with the raison d’eˆtre of the
exception’’49 that the jurisprudence recognizes in favour of free competition. In a
highly pertinent section of the judgment, the CFI explains the rationale for
this exception:

. . . . the Community judicature considers that the fact that the holder of
an intellectual property right can exploit that right solely for his own
beneﬁt constitutes the very substance of his exclusive right. Accordingly,
a simple refusal, even on the part of an undertaking in a dominant
position, to grant a licence to a third party cannot in itself constitute an
abuse of a dominant position within the meaning of Article 82. It is only
when it is accompanied by exceptional circumstances such as those

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

313

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

hereto envisaged in the caselaw that such a refusal can be characterised
as abusive and that, accordingly, it is permissible, in the public interest in
maintaining effective competition on the market, to encroach upon the
exclusive right of the holder of the intellectual property right by
requiring him to grant licences to third parties seeking to enter or
remain on that market.50

Conﬁdential information and trade secrets also have no immunity, the CFI
having dismissed Microsoft’s argument that the fact that the relevant technology
was secret and of signiﬁcant value to licensees provided objective justiﬁcation for its
refusal to disclose. The withholding of information was, said the CFI, a unilateral
business decision on Microsoft’s part and there was no reason why secret technol-
ogy should enjoy a higher level of protection than technology that had been
disclosed to the public, for example in a patent speciﬁcation.51

Discussion

The public interest exception referred to by the CFI corresponds to a similar
exception in the United States, where the courts have conﬁrmed that IP rights
are essentially no different to other property rights, in terms of their lack of
immunity from the anti-trust rules (Anderman, 2004; Merges, 1999). However, US
anti-trust regulators have said publicly that the compulsory licensing remedy must
be kept strictly within bounds, bearing in mind the potential for regulators to get it
wrong, which carries with it the risk of a chilling effect on innovation (Delrahim,
2004).

Before the Microsoft decision, a number of commentators had been unable to
credit the idea that the principles set out in Magill should be applied across the
board, to all IP rights (Meinberg, 2006; Reimann, 2004). In giving judgment in a
case heard in the specialist UK Patents Court in 1998, Mr Justice Laddie (as he then
was) doubted whether the ‘‘exceptional circumstances’’ criterion in Magill applied
to patents.52 The trivial nature of the right subsisting in a simple list of TV
programmes that was in issue in Magill led some commentators to speculate as
to whether Magill was a rare example of the community courts’ disapproval of
‘‘disproportionate leverage’’, i.e. ‘‘small’’ property rights being used to effect a scale
of commercial leverage that was not in proportion to the degree of creativity that
had been exerted (Korah, 1996). Such cases might be classiﬁed as copyright misuse
in the United States53 (see also Merges, 1999).

The sweeping nature of the CFI’s judgment in the Microsoft case represents a
potentially signiﬁcant shift in the EU case law, or at least an important clariﬁcation.
It dilutes the apparently stringent test for compulsory licensing previously set out in
Volvo v Veng and Magill. The CFI has conﬁrmed that the IP rights of companies—
including patents—are no more immune from competition law than any other kinds
of assets, if the regulator can articulate clear concerns about market structure,
competition and future effects on innovation.

314

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

Conclusions
It is worth emphasizing that the facts of the Microsoft case were unusual. It has
already been noted that in reaching its decision, the Commission attached sig-
niﬁcance to aspects of Microsoft’s past behaviour, speciﬁcally, the change in
Microsoft’s policy relating to the disclosure of interoperability information at a
time when it was seeking to increase its share in the market for work group server
operating systems.

Anti-trust regulators on both sides of the Atlantic acknowledge that it is more
appropriate to focus on the actual economic effects that result from certain
behaviours, rather than having rules set in stone that automatically condemn
speciﬁc activities. In recent years, EU competition policy has certainly moved away
from the rigid application of rules that typiﬁed the Commission’s decisional practice
during the 1960s and 70s. The Commission now has a progressive, economics-based
policy under article 81 that recognizes (for example) that cooperation between
companies can sometimes assist in the development and exploitation of new
technologies, thereby enabling more and better products to be brought to market
and allowing greater consumer choice.

Despite the publication by the Commission of a review of exclusionary abuses
in December 2005,54 European policy on unilateral conduct has not been reformed
and the Commission still applies form-based rules, based on assumptions of harm,
in applying article 82. The consequence of this is that abuses are categorized (e.g.
‘‘tying’’ and ‘‘refusals to deal’’) and condemned, without necessarily examining in
detail the actual economic impact of the activities of a dominant ﬁrm in any
particular case. In the Microsoft case, for example, the fact that the Windows PC
operating system provides a platform for others to innovate in order to bring new
applications to market with a guarantee of reaching the majority of consumers was
not a matter for consideration under article 82.

Those advocating a traditionalist approach to anti-trust enforcement in the
EU would no doubt condemn the exercise of market power that could result in a
more monopolistic market structure. For the CFI at least,
it seems that the
Microsoft case fell into this category. The Commission’s decision was essentially
predicated on a perceived risk to future competition, which is acceptable under an
analysis of unilateral conduct under article 82, as conﬁrmed by the CFI. However,
the decision has drawn criticism from US anti-trust regulators as potentially
harming consumers by chilling innovation and discouraging competition.55 The
EU ruling was intended to encourage alternative poles of innovation within the
software industry, but only time will tell if the Commission’s disclosure remedy
achieves this goal.

Finally, a question for IP rights-holders is whether the CFI’s Microsoft
judgment has broader signiﬁcance for the technology strategies and IP leveraging
policies of undertakings with signiﬁcant market shares. The judgment raises
the spectre of business decisions (such as choosing a licensee) being over-ridden
at some point in the future by the EU competition rules, with obvious knock-on

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

315

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

effects for commercial decisions about whether to invest in a particular area of
technology.

About the Author

Dr Duncan Curley is a solicitor at Innovate Legal, London, UK.

He qualiﬁed in 1995 at Clifford Chance and in 2003 he became a partner in the
intellectual property, media and technology department at McDermott, Will &
Emery. In 2007, Dr Curley founded a new IP law ﬁrm, Innovate Legal. Dr Curley’s
practice consists predominantly of patent and trade mark litigation in the English
courts. He is a specialist in dealing with anti-trust counterclaims in the context of IP
disputes, having acted in one of the major UK cases on ‘‘Eurodefences’’ (Sandvik v
Pﬁffner, patents) and in the case of Sportswear v Stonestyle (trademarks). Dr Curley
is a frequent speaker on IP issues, including a recent participation on a panel
discussion of IP/anti-trust issues at the IP Business Congress in Amsterdam (June
2008). His publications include a report on Supplementary Protection Certiﬁcates
(Extending Rewards for Innovative Drug Development), originally commissioned for
the UK Government’s review of the intellectual property system. Dr Curley is also
the author of Intellectual Property Licences and Technology Transfer, a book on the
European Technology Transfer Block Exemption Regulation, and numerous legal
articles and opinions in journals such as European Intellectual Property Review and
Patent World. Dr Curley is a member of Council of the Intellectual Property
Institute, he is an associate member of the Chartered Institute of Patent Attorneys
in the United Kingdom and a member of the Laws Committee of the Licensing
Executives Society (Britain and Ireland section); e-mail: duncancurley@innovate
legal.co.uk

Notes

The author is grateful to Microsoft for ﬁnancial support in the preparation of this paper. All
views expressed are the author’s own and not necessarily shared by Microsoft.

1 Case T-201/04: Judgment (hereafter the CFI Judgment) of the Court of First Instance
(Grand Chamber) on the Application by Microsoft Corp. for annulment of Commission
Decision 2007/53/EC of 24 March 2004.

2 Microsoft has recently appealed a ﬁne imposed by the Commission for non-compliance

with its 24 March 2004 decision, but not the substantive judgment of the CFI.

3 Case COMP/C-3/37.792 Microsoft [2007] OJ L32/23/ (hereafter referred to as the

‘‘Commission’s Decision’’).

4 [2007] OJ C306/1, as amended by the Treaty of Lisbon, signed at Lisbon, 13 December

2007 (now the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union).

5 [1995] ECR I-743.
6 [2004] ECR I-5039.
7 It is instructive to note that in addition to the two main protagonists in the case, by the
time of the main hearing before the CFI in April 2006, there were no less than 14 further

316

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

companies and trade associations who had been given leave to intervene in the
proceedings in support of one party or another.

8 According to the deﬁnition on the website of the Free Software Foundation (available at
http://www.fsf.org [Accessed on December 2007]), ‘‘free software’’ is a matter of liberty,
not price: ‘‘Free software is a matter of the users’ freedom to run, copy, distribute, study,
change and improve the software’’. It refers to four kinds of freedom for the users of the
software: the freedom to run the program, for any purpose; the freedom to study how
the program works and adapt it to the user’s needs; the freedom to redistribute copies;
the freedom to improve the program and release those improvements to the public, so
that the whole community beneﬁts.

9 Supra n. 4.

10 Commission Notice 2004/C101/02: Guidelines on the Application of article 81 of the EC

Treaty to Technology Transfer Agreements.

11 At paragraphs 210–35.
12 The so-called ordoliberal approach to competition policy underlying article 82 (see

Ngwe and Rose, 2007; Van Miert, 1998).

13 United States v Microsoft Corporation, Civil Action No. 98-1232 and 1232 (TPJ),

described in detail in Gordon (2003).

14 Commission Decision, supra n. 3, recital 431.
15 Windows XP N was released in June 2005 and Windows Vista was subsequently released

in Europe in two versions, one with the Media Player functionality removed.

16 Commission Decision, supra n. 3, recital 53.
17 In June 2004, the US Court of Appeals afﬁrmed the settlement that Microsoft had

reached with the US Department of Justice and several US states.

18 In May 2006, Microsoft agreed to extend its communications protocols licensing

program until 2009.

19 Commission Decision, supra n. 3, recital 277.
20 Ibid., recital 499.
21 Proposal by the European Commission for a Directive on the patentability of computer-

implemented inventions COM (2002) 92 ﬁnal.
22 Commission Decision, supra n. 3, article 1(1).
23 Paris Act, 24 July 1971 as amended on 29 September 1979.
24 CFI Judgment, supra n. 1, paragraph 227.
25 As reported in the Financial Times, 27 April 2006.
26 Footnote 249 to recital 190 in the Commission Decision, supra n. 3
27 By order of the President of the CFI in a judgment dated 22 December 2004, [2004] ECR

II-4463.

28 ‘‘For the purposes of this Directive, the term ‘‘computer program’’ shall include their

preparatory design material.’’

29 Including, for example, European patent 0438571 B1 ‘‘Method and system for open ﬁle

caching in a networked computer system’’.

30 CFI Judgment, supra n. 1, paragraphs 283–9.
31 Ibid., paragraph 290.
32 [1974] ECR 223.

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

317

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

33 [1988] ECR 6211.
34 The form of the questions referred is helpfully set out at the end of the article by Stothers

(2004).

35 Consistent with the position it took in its subsequent discussion paper on the application

of article 82 of the Treaty to exclusionary abuses (at paragraph 242).

36 CFI Judgment, supra n. 1, paragraph 332.
37 Ibid., paragraphs 379 et seq. See, for example, Case C-120/97, Upjohn [1999] ECR I-223,

paragraph 34 and Case T-179/00, A. Menarini v Commission [2002] ECR II-2879,
paragraphs 44 and 45.

38 Ibid., paragraph 561.
39 Ibid., paragraph 563.
40 Ibid., paragraph 647.
41 Ibid., paragraph 656.
42 Ibid., paragraph 662.
43 Ibid., paragraph 664.
44 Ibid., paragraph 665.
45 Commission Decision, supra n. 3, recital 783.
46 CFI Judgment, supra n. 1, paragraphs 704 et seq.
47 In the interests of balance, it should be noted that there is no concrete evidence that the
US remedy has had any positive material impact on market outcomes either: Evans et al.
(2005).

48 CFI Judgment, supra n. 1, paragraph 710.
49 Ibid., paragraph 690.
50 Ibid., paragraph 691.
51 Ibid., paragraph 693.
52 (1998) 2 CMLR 839.
53 As in the US case Alcatel USA Inc. v DGI Technology Inc. 166 F.3d 772 (5th

Circuit1999).

54 DG Competition discussion paper on the application of article 82 (ibid.).
55 Comments of Mr Thomas Barnett, as noted in the Financial Times, 23 September 2007.

References

Anderman, S. (2004) ‘Does the Microsoft Case Offer a New Paradigm for the ‘‘Exceptional

Circumstances’’ Test and Compulsory Copyright Licenses under EC Competition
Law?’, The Competition Law Review, 1(2), 7–22.

Buono, F. M. (2005) ‘‘Interoperability’’, Not ‘‘Interchangeability’’: The Importance of a

Proper Approach to Deﬁning and Achieving ‘‘Interoperability’’ to Enhance Competition,
Innovation and Consumer Choice in the Information Technology Marketplace [online].
Available at hhttp://www.metrocorpcounsel.com/current.php?artType=view&art
Month=February&artYear=2007&EntryNo=73i [Accessed December 2007].
Buono, F. M. and Sieverding, M. (2007) ‘GPL Version 3: Two Steps Back for Open

Source Licensing, Interoperability, and Open Innovation?’, Les Nouvelles, XLII(2),
405–12.

Cook, T. (2004) ‘Has Copyright Hit the Wall?’, Copyright World, 142, 20–2.

318

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Duncan Curley

Curley, D. (2004) Intellectual Property Licences and Technology Transfer. Chandos

Publishing, Oxford.

Curley, D. (2006) ‘Balancing Intellectual Property Rights and Competition Law in a

Dynamic, Knowledge-Based European Economy’, in M. Pugatch (ed.), The Intellectual
Property Debate. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, pp. 213–29.

Curley, D. and Garrod, D. (2004) ‘European Technology Transfer Regulation Embraces

Software Licences—But Is It All Good News?’, Computers and Law, 15(1), 21.

Czarnota, B. and Hart, R. J. (1991) Legal Protection of Computer Programs in Europe—A

Guide to the EC Directive. Butterworths, London, p. 82.

Delrahim, M. (2004) Forcing Firms to Share the Sandbox: Compulsory Licensing of

Intellectual Property Rights and Antitrust, speech to the British Institute of International
and Comparative Law, 10 May [online]. Available at hhttp://www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/
speeches/203627.htmi [Accessed December 2007].

Dolmans, M. and Graf, T. (2004) ‘Analysis of Tying Under Article 82 EC: The European
Commission’s Microsoft Decision in Perspective’, World Competition, 27(2), 225–44.
Evans, D. S., Nichols, A. L. and Schmalensee, R. (2005) ‘United States v Microsoft: Did

Consumers Win?’, Journal of Competition Law and Economics, 1(3), 497–539.

Gordon, R. L. (2003) Antitrust Abuse in the New Economy: The Microsoft Case. Edward

Elgar, Cheltenham.

Hart, R. J. (2006) ‘Interoperability Information and the Microsoft Decision’, European

Intellectual Property Review, 7, 361–5.

Kairo, J. and Paulweber, M. (2001) ‘High Technology Industries, Private Restraints on

Innovation, and EU Antitrust Law: The European Approach to Market Analysis of
R&D Competition Part II’, RTkom, 2, 68–78.

Kappos, D. and Strimaitis, R. (2006) ‘Why Collaboration is Crucial’, Managing Intellectual

Property, December 2006/January 2007, 31–3.

Korah, V. (1996) Technology Transfer Agreements and the EC Competition Rules. Clarendon

Press, Oxford, p. 54.

K ¨uhn, K. U. and Van Reenen, J. (2007) Interoperability and Market Foreclosure in the

European Microsoft Case [online]. Available at hhttp://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=1013929i [Accessed December 2007].

K ¨uhn, K. U., Stillman, R. and Caffara, C. (2005) ‘Economic Theories of Bundling and their

Policy Implications in Abuse Cases: An Assessment in Light of the Microsoft Case’,
European Competition Journal, 1, 85–122.

L ´eveˆ que, F. (2005) Innovation, Leveraging and Essential Facilities: Interoperability Licensing
in the EU Microsoft Case [online]. Available at hhttp://www.cerna.ensmp.fr/Documents/
FL-Ms-WorldCompetition.pdfi [Accessed December 2007].

Mahony, I. G. and Naughton, E. J. (2004) ‘Open Source Software Monetized: Out of the

Bazaar and into Big Business’, Computer & Internet Lawyer, 21(10), 1–17.

Marsland, R. (2003) ‘Reconstructing Microsoft: The New Marshall Plan’, Intellectual Asset

Management, 2, 15–8.

Meinberg, H. (2006) ‘From Magill to IMS Health: The New Product Requirement and the

Diversity of Intellectual Property Rights’, European Intellectual Property Review, 7,
398–403.

Merges, R. P. (1999) Who Owns the Charles River Bridge? Intellectual Property and

Competition in the Software Industry, UC Berkeley Public Law and Legal Theory

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4

319

Duncan Curley

Interoperability and Other Issues at the IP–Anti-trust Interface

Working Paper Series (No.15), downloaded from the Social Science Research Network
[online]. Available at hhttp://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=208089i
[Accessed December 2007] .

Ngwe, C. and Rose, I. (2007) ‘The Ordoliberal Tradition in the European Union, its Inﬂuence

on Article 82 EC and the IBA’s Comments on the Article 82 EC Discussion Paper’,
Competition Law International, February, 3(1) 8–12.

Ong, B. (2004) ‘Anti-competitive Refusals to Grant Copyright Licences: Reﬂections on the

IMS Saga’, European Intellectual Property Review, 11, 505–14.

Reimann, C. (2004) ‘Essential Function vs Essential Facility: Deﬁning the Amount of R&D

Protection in High-Tech Industries After IMS and Microsoft’, The Competition Law
Review, 1(2), 49–64.

Stothers, C. (2004) ‘IMS Health and its Implicatons for Compulsory Licensing in Europe’,

European Intellectual Property Review, 10, 467–72.

Temple Lang, J. (2004) ‘Mandating Access: The Principles and the Problems in Intellectual

Property and Competition Policy’, European Business Law Review, 1087–113.

Van Miert, K. (1998) The Future of European Competition Policy, speech of 17 September

1998 [online]. Available at hhttp://ec.europa.eu/comm/competition/speeches/text/sp
1998_042_en.htmli [Accessed December 2007].

Zuck, J. (2005) ‘Public Services Interoperability in Europe’, European Review of Political

Technologies [online], 3. Available at hhttp://www.politech-institute.org/review/articles/
ZUCK_Jonathan_volume_3.pdfi [Accessed December 2007].

320

r 2008 The Author. Journal Compilation r 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2008) Vol. 11, no. 4


