The  (2011) Vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 383–402
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2011.00424.x

Implementing the Nagoya Protocol on ABS: A
Hypothetical Case Study on Enforcing Beneﬁt
Sharing in Norway

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald
Fridtjof Nansen Institute (FNI), Oslo, Norway

In October 2010, the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing
of Beneﬁts Arising From Their Utilization (NP) was adopted at the Conference of the Parties (COP-10) of
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). The NP establishes rules on measures to be taken by user
countries in the context of access and beneﬁt sharing (ABS). The future success of ABS as embedded in CBD
and the Nagoya Protocol depends on their implementation at a national level. The binding rules of CBD and
NP have in common that they need to be transformed into national legal and political contexts to establish a
functional system for ABS. This article addresses measures that are needed in the international regime to secure
adoption and implementation of user-country measures which are compatible with provider-country legislation.
It analyses one current example of user-country legislation: the recently adopted Norwegian legislation, for the
purpose of ﬁnding options for and obstacles to implementing obligations in the CBD and the NP in national law
and in actual practice. One part of the ABS challenge is that obligations in the CBD and the NP apply to states,
whereas the actual users of genetic resources are mostly private or public enterprises: companies, universities or
other institutions. Despite showing a promising start, far from all challenges of a functional ABS system are
solved.
Keywords implementation of ABS; Nagoya Protocol; Norway; Nature Diversity Act; user-country legislation

In October 2010, the Nagoya Protocol (NP) on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and
Equitable Sharing of Beneﬁts Arising from their Utilization was adopted at the Conference of the
Parties (COP-10) of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). The NP establishes rules on
measures to be taken by user countries in the context of access and beneﬁt sharing (ABS). There
is a need to discuss good practice and implementation of the Protocol. For countries parties to the
CBD but not yet parties to the Protocol, it is crucial to discuss how the obligation to ensure that
users of genetic resources share beneﬁts arising from their use of such resources can be implemented
in national legislation. This article draws upon the experience from one of the few user countries to
have implemented such legislation and seeks to identify elements that can form a part of national
legislation implementing article 15.7 of the CBD seen in conjunction with, in particular, articles 5,
6, 7, 9, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 of the NP. We assume that all countries that are parties to the CBD,
being bound by its article 15, are committed to fulﬁlling their ABS obligations. This article addresses
measures that are needed in the international regime to secure adoption and implementation of
user-country measures, which are compatible with provider-country legislation.1 For these purposes,
we will analyse one current example of user-country legislation: the recently adopted Norwegian
legislation. The intention here is to analyse options for and obstacles to implementing obligations in
the CBD and the NP in national law and in actual practice. One part of the ABS challenge is that

C(cid:2) 383

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

obligations in the CBD and the NP apply to states, whereas the actual users of genetic resources are
mostly private or public enterprises: companies, universities or other institutions. Countries need to
take measures to ensure that the actual users of genetic resources meet the ABS standards.2

Legal certainty and functionality were important objectives during the negotiations of the
Nagoya Protocol (NP). “Legal certainty” has been explained as the ability of each user, provider,
national legislator, ofﬁcial, judge, arbitrator or other person to know, with a relatively high degree of
certainty, whether the regime applies to a particular person or action, and, if so, what the regime will
require (or probably require) in each instance.3

This contribution takes the access and beneﬁt sharing (ABS) discussion to the ground level
by considering how existing national user measures would apply to a particular transaction. These
discussions take the form of a “thought-experiment” (hypothetical case study) considering particular
types of legal or administrative action and how they relate to measures adopted by provider countries.

Outline of User-Country Obligations in the Nagoya Protocol
The ﬁrst step of our analysis is to identify the measures that the NP requires user countries to take,
in light of obligations under article 15 of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) (Tvedt and
Young, 2007). A general observation is that both article 15.7 of the CBD and the NP offer a level
of ﬂexibility for countries when implementing ABS measures in their legislation. Our objective is
not to provide a complete implementation study, but to present the provisions of the NP as a back-
ground for better understanding this case study: the implementation of user-country obligations in
Norway.

One core element of the NP is that user countries undertake an obligation to take measures so
that “beneﬁts arising from the utilization of genetic resources as well as subsequent applications and
commercialization shall be shared in a fair and equitable with the Party providing such resources
. . . ” (NP article 5.1). For this purpose, “each Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy
measures, as appropriate” (NP article 5.3). These provisions share common features with CBD article
15.7. According to article 6.2 of the NP, user countries undertake to ensure that access to genetic
resources takes place in accordance with prior informed consent (PIC). This obligation is further
elaborated in NP article 15:

1. Each Party shall take appropriate, effective and proportionate legislative, administrative or policy
measures to provide that genetic resources utilized within its jurisdiction have been accessed in
accordance with PIC and that mutually agreed terms (MAT) have been established, as required by
the domestic access and beneﬁt-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements of the other Party.
sit-
uations of non-compliance with measures adopted in accordance with paragraph 1
above.

take appropriate, effective and proportionate measures

to address

2. Parties

shall

3. Parties shall, as far as possible and as appropriate, cooperate in cases of alleged violation of
domestic access and beneﬁt-sharing legislation or regulatory requirements referred to in paragraph
1 above.

Similar obligations are established in relation to access to traditional knowledge associated with

genetic resources in articles 7 and 16 of the NP (Bavikatte and Robinson, 2011).

The wording of articles 15 and 16 emphasizes that user countries shall ensure that users have
adhered to the legislation of provider countries and that user countries shall address situations
of non-compliance. This means that “access” is essential for making ABS operational. During the
negotiations, there were considerable divergences regarding exactly when “access to genetic resources”

384

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

happens. One fairly common opinion among user countries was that a genetic resource is accessed
at the point in time when the biological sample is crossing a border; by contrast, provider countries
often opined that access occurs when biological material is used for the purpose of taking advantage
of its genetic material, independent of when and under which conditions the biological material
actually crosses a border.4 Between these views, there is a gap in practical effects for the application
of ABS. To establish a functional system for implementing the NP, countries will need to agree on
when “access” happens.

One mechanism that can streamline ABS is NP article 19.1, which encourages the “development,
update and use of sectoral and cross-sectoral model contractual clauses”. The development of such
models will contribute to a higher degree of legal functionality of the ABS system.

Important from the perspective of technical enforcement is article 18, which provides some
general rules and standards regarding implementation and enforcement of MAT. MAT is one of
the core legal vehicles for governing ABS transactions across borders. User countries undertake
to designate checkpoints and to share information through certiﬁcates of compliance, in order to
monitor utilization of genetic resources and thus support compliance with the ABS obligations
(article 17).

According to article 10:

Parties shall consider the need for and modalities of a global multilateral beneﬁt sharing
mechanism to address the fair and equitable sharing of beneﬁts derived from the utilization
of genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources that
occur in transboundary situations or for which it is not possible to grant or obtain prior
informed consent. [emphasis added]

This provision was brought onto the table at a very late stage of the negotiations and needs to
be further developed in order to become operational. It could become an important tool to ensure
effective beneﬁt sharing. However, the obligations to share beneﬁts with the global multilateral
beneﬁt-sharing mechanism should be designed so that they do not undermine the incentives to enter
into MAT with the party providing access to the genetic resource (Tvedt, 2011).

This overview of the core user-country rules of the NP is not exhaustive, and each of the
provisions gives rise to questions when implemented in national legislation. Despite attempts during
negotiations to go into detail with regard to how a functional ABS system can be constructed (see
Tvedt and Rukundo, 2010), the Working Group maintained the principle of sovereignty of countries
to regulate access to genetic resources under their jurisdiction. The NP does not alter the basic
understanding that ABS is based on a contract between the provider country and user of genetic
resources, or an administrative decision of the provider country.

Recent Developments in Norwegian Legislation
Norway’s Legislative Efforts to Meet Obligations under Article 15.7 of the CBD: The Norwegian
Nature Diversity Act
Section 60 of the Norwegian Nature Diversity Act, which passed the Storting (the Parliament
of Norway) on 19 June 2009, implemented a general rule concerning genetic material from other
countries.5 Together with the disclosure requirements in section 8b of the Patent Act6 and section 4(3)
of the Act relating to the Plant Breeder’s Right,7 section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act constitutes
the ABS user-country measures of Norway. In the following, we discuss these provisions and their
potential application as well as implications for interpretation and implementation of user-country
obligations under the NP.

C(cid:2) 385

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

The Nature Diversity Act speciﬁcally recognizes that the main entity responsible for regulating
ABS is the provider country. This is in line with the approach in NP article 15. Although the
government considered including a speciﬁc statement of the obligation to share beneﬁts, it concluded
that the Act did not need such a clause, leaving it to the provider countries to require beneﬁt sharing.8
The preparatory works explicitly state that “these measures [provided in the act] do not alone fully
solve the challenge of meeting the obligation of fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing”,9 clearly recognize
that the measures require support in other legal and political tools, and call on provider countries
to provide the supplementary tools needed. The preparatory works also emphasize the need for
controlling the right to use the material either at the time of use or at the time of commercialization
rather than at the time of access, recognizing that a “utilization approach” is the most practical and
enforceable option for an international regime.

Giving Binding Effect to the Consent Given by the Provider
In order to implement ABS, section 60(1) of the Nature Diversity Act states:

The import for utilisation in Norway of genetic material from a state that requires consent
for collection or export of such material may only take place in accordance with such
consent. The person that has control of the material is bound by the conditions that have
been set for consent. The state may enforce the conditions by bringing legal action on
behalf of the person that set them.

This paragraph imposes two important obligations upon any user of genetic material. Import
of genetic material to Norway can take place only in accordance with PIC. After the import, any
possessor of the material is bound by the PIC. Norway thus instructs its courts and authorities to
directly apply the terms set by the provider country.

Although a huge step forward in ABS implementation, this approach has two weaknesses: (1) it
creates a level of uncertainty for Norwegian users and decision makers, given that access legislation
will vary among countries, creating legal uncertainty as to whether and how each country’s provider-
side law will affect rights and obligations of users. The uncertainty is likely to increase signiﬁcantly
if the importer of the genetic materials subsequently transfers these to a third party. (2) There is no
speciﬁc minimum requirement to ensure fair and equitable beneﬁt sharing, neither in the Norwegian
Act nor in the NP. The Act apparently assumes that beneﬁt sharing in accordance with provider-
country requirements will be fair and equitable.

In recognition of the resource difﬁculties for a provider wanting to enforce a beneﬁt-sharing
clause, the Act establishes procedural competence for Norwegian authorities to take legal action on
behalf of the relevant country or institution. This rule is a major addition to the former legal situation
in Norway relating to ABS (Tvedt, 2006). While it is most likely that the Ofﬁce of the Attorney General
would be responsible for acting on behalf of the Norwegian government (the state),10 the initiative
to bring a case to the attention of the Attorney General needs to come from another governmental
body or institutions with specialized competence. Hence, a provider of genetic materials who wants
to beneﬁt from section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act would probably be best helped by contacting
the Norwegian National Focal Point for ABS within the Ministry of the Environment.11 It should
be noted that the decision on whether to initiate a case on behalf of a provider would depend on
the discretion of Norwegian authorities. According to the Public Administration Act, the authorities
will probably have to provide a reasoned decision on whether to initiate a case, and the provider has
the right of administrative appeal.12

According to chapter IX of the Nature Diversity Act, a user who fails to comply with the
requirements of section 60 may be ordered to provide the information, and may, if failing to comply

386

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

with the order, be subject to a coercive ﬁne (sections 69 and 73, respectively). Wilful or negligent
violation of obligations under section 60 may also be subject to penal proceedings according to section
75 of the Act. Possible penalties are ﬁnes and up to 1–3 years imprisonment, depending on the severity
of the crime. Norwegian penal legislation opens for penalties being applied not only to persons, but
also to enterprises: see sections 48a and 48b of the General Civil Penal Code.13 Enterprises can be
punished even if no individual person may be prosecuted for the action in question.

Obligation to Possess and Pass on Information
Section 60(2) of the Nature Diversity Act extends the importer’s substantive obligation to subsequent
utilizers of the genetic material:

When genetic material from another country is utilised in Norway for research or com-
mercial purposes, it shall be accompanied by information regarding the country from
which the genetic material has been received (provider country). If national law in the
provider country requires consent for the collection of biological material, it shall be
accompanied by information to the effect that such consent has been obtained.

On the one hand, the requirement that genetic material be followed by relevant documentation
could be read to indicate that the government views genetic resources as a physical rather than an
informational resource (Schei and Tvedt, 2010). This reading of the provision is supported by the fact
that parallel provisions in the Patent Act and the Act relating to the Plant Breeder’s Right apply to
biological material (see below). On the other hand, nothing would prevent countries from requiring
documentation to follow the exchange of genetic resources in the form of information, independent
of the biological material from which such resources have been derived. Such a requirement may from
a practical perspective be more difﬁcult to enforce when applied to information than when applied
to biological material as such.

Section 60(3) extends the information requirement to instances where a genetic resource has been

imported through a third country:

If the provider country is a country other than the country of origin of the genetic material,
the country of origin shall also be stated. The country of origin means the country in
which the material was collected from in situ sources. If national law in the country of
origin requires consent for the collection of genetic material, information as to whether
such consent has been obtained shall be provided. If the information under this paragraph
is not known, this shall be stated.

The information requirement could thus be fulﬁlled by stating that the country of origin and
conditions for using the material are unknown. The effect of including this option in section 60 is
far-reaching. Where the importer or user does not have the information, there is no speciﬁc obligation
to search for such information. In such instances, it would be hard for the Norwegian authorities
or the country of origin to raise claims concerning beneﬁt sharing, as they would carry the initial
burden of proving the claim. The effect of this rule is thus likely to render section 60 ineffective when
the genetic material has been imported through a third country or where the origin of the genetic
material is unclear.

Article 10 of the NP will be particularly important in such situations. Depending on the modal-
ities of the future Global Multilateral Beneﬁt-Sharing Mechanism, user countries could undertake
obligations to ensure that users of genetic resources contribute to the Mechanism where the origin
of the genetic resource remains unknown. Thus, a patentee informing that the origin of the material
is unknown might become a trigger point for the beneﬁt-sharing obligation with the Mechanism

C(cid:2) 387

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

rather than with the actual unknown provider country. Unless accompanied by speciﬁc obligations
to search for and provide information concerning the origin of the genetic resource, the Mechanism
could signiﬁcantly undermine the effectiveness of obligations to share beneﬁts directly with the coun-
try of origin. One consequence could be to weaken the incentive of countries of origin to ensure
effective conservation of their biological diversity (NP article 1).

The remaining clauses in section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act address the obligation to provide
information when the utilization of genetic resources involves the use of traditional knowledge and
where access to the genetic material is provided under the Multilateral System of ABS under Part IV
of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA, 2001).

The Link to Patent Law
Norway has adopted provisions concerning disclosure of information concerning the origin of bio-
logical material, in section 8b of the Patent Act14 and section 4(3) of the Act relating to the Plant
Breeder’s Right. The required disclosures under the Patent Act involve several different and comple-
mentary types of information:

The countries from which the inventor received or collected the biological material;
If PIC is required in the provider country, information about the existence of such consent

shall be included;

The country of origin, if different from the provider country; if information concerning the

country of origin is not known, this shall be stated;

If PIC is required in the country of origin, information about the existence of such consent

shall be included;

If access to the biological materials has been provided in pursuance of articles 12.2 and 12.3
of the ITPGRFA, a copy of the standard material transfer agreement shall be enclosed with
the patent application.

The same obligations to provide information apply to applications for plant variety protection.
Interestingly, the focus of these obligations is on biological material—not genetic resources, as
in CBD article 15.7 and the Protocol. This means that the disclosure obligations go beyond what
is required for ABS purposes under the CBD. The obligations will, for example, apply also to
instances in which an invention is based on a chemical or other component found in the biological
material.

One condition for triggering the disclosure requirements is that “an invention concerns or
uses biological material”, which implies a very low threshold of dependency or similarity between
the biological material and the invention. The Patent Act goes on to specify that the disclosure
requirements apply also “where the inventor has altered the structure of the received material”,
underscoring the legislator’s desire to give broad scope to the rule by including all genetically modiﬁed
organisms. A second condition for triggering the disclosure obligations is that the user country is not
the same as the country of origin, with the latter understood as “the country from which the material
was collected from its natural environment”.

The Patent Act requires the applicant to state whether PIC exists if the country of origin requires
such consent in its domestic legislation. However, there is no further requirement to inform about
the content of the PIC, in particular the conditions on which the consent has been given, so that the
authorities would be able to control the lawfulness of the subsequent use of the biological material.
Similarly, there is no obligation to inform about agreements concerning beneﬁt sharing. When the
biological material has passed through a third country, the patent applicant shall inform about the
country of origin and whether PIC exists in relation to this country. However, if this information is

388

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

not known to the patent applicant, the applicant needs to only include a statement to this effect in
the application.

Against this background, we can observe that the obligations contained in section 8b of the
Patent Act and section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act do not create a functional regime for bene-
ﬁt sharing on their own. Their contribution is to provide information that could hypothetically be
used in an enforcement action under section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act. It is also not always
easy, from a practical-legal point of view, to prove that an invention “concerns or uses” a particular
biological material. The challenge of applying and enforcing the obligation may be very difﬁcult
to overcome, particularly since enforcement, ultimately through penal sanctions, would depend on
fulﬁlling the evidentiary standards of in dubio pro re—one is assumed innocent until proven guilty.
In the case of a false statement, including statements that relevant information is unavailable or
that there is no relevant information, the applicant is subject to penal sanctions under sections 73
and 75 of the Nature Diversity Act or section 166 of the General Civil Penal Code (in cases of
non-compliance with the Patent Act and the Act relating to the Plant Breeder’s Right). In the latter
cases, the prosecutor must investigate whether the information is wrongful, and must provide suf-
ﬁcient evidence, beyond any reasonable doubt, for the information both being wrongful and that
it was wrongful deliberately.15 A patent applicant found guilty of false statements about the ori-
gin or the provider or regarding PIC may face ﬁnes or imprisonment for a maximum of 2 years.
Fines will be due to the Norwegian government. There is no follow-up procedure to ensure that
beneﬁts must be shared with the provider or the country of origin. There is thus discrepancy be-
tween the objective of beneﬁt sharing and the procedures to be applied in cases of breaches of the
law.

One signiﬁcant reason why the disclosure requirements are unlikely to contribute effectively to
beneﬁt sharing is the lack of speciﬁc and automatic legal consequences from non-compliance. As
noted in the Patent Act, the consequence of not meeting the disclosure obligation “is without prejudice
to the processing of patent applications or the validity of rights arising from granted patents.”16
The same reservation has been included in section 4(3) of the Act relating to the Plant Breeder’s
Right.

A further limitation of the practical signiﬁcance of the patent disclosure requirement as a func-
tionally effective user-country measure arises from its limited application. Section 8b of the Patent
Act applies only to patent applications addressed to and ﬁled directly with the Norwegian Patent
Ofﬁce, and not when patents are sent via the system under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT).17
Moreover, since Norway joined the European Patent Organization (EPO), the number of patents ﬁled
directly with the Norwegian Patent Ofﬁce has declined signiﬁcantly.18 The lack of a corresponding
disclosure requirement in the European Patent Convention may be a motivating factor for patentees
to channel biotechnological patents through the European system rather than through the Norwegian
system.

For the information gathered through the arrangement set up under the Patent Act and the
Act relating to the Plant Breeder’s Right to contribute to effective beneﬁt sharing, the relevant au-
thorities would need to ensure that information is passed on to authorities tasked with following
up section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act. As no procedures or information are available on the
websites of the relevant Norwegian institutions, we asked whether information concerning origin
of genetic materials was available concerning patent applications and applications for plant variety
rights, and whether there were procedures to make such information available to source countries
or authorities responsible for following up section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act. The Ministry of
the Environment, the Norwegian Industrial Property Ofﬁce and the Norwegian Plant Variety Board
responded that no procedures had been established to ensure availability and transfer of information.

C(cid:2) 389

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

The Norwegian Contact Point to ABS had no information regarding intellectual property rights
based on genetic materials originating outside Norway. The Norwegian Industrial Property Ofﬁce
informed us of the existence of 17 applications relevant to section 8b of the Patent Act, which has
been in force since 2003. Of these, 13 had been withdrawn or rejected, and information was thus
not publicly available. Of the remaining four, two had included information on country of origin,
one application had been rejected and one was still so early in the application process that no
information was available. The Norwegian Plant Variety Board informed us that they had no infor-
mation available concerning the origin of genetic materials related to applications for plant variety
rights.

Against this background, we conclude that, although Norway has adopted legislation that
has been regarded as very advanced19 and beneﬁcial to beneﬁt sharing, no signiﬁcant adminis-
trative efforts have been put in place to ensure effective implementation. The relevant legislation
was adopted in 2003 (amendment to the Patent Act) and 2009 (the Nature Diversity Act and
the amendment to the Act relating to the Plant Breeder’s Right). The failure of Norwegian au-
thorities to follow up is particularly troubling in light of the political importance of the amend-
ment to the Patent Act20 and the more than 8 years spent in preparing the Nature Diversity
Act.21

A Hypothetical Case Study: Enforcing Beneﬁt Sharing in Norway
Three ABS Situations
With this hypothetical case study, we take up the following three ABS situations:

1. The provider country and the user have agreed to MAT in the form of an instrument that can be

applied and enforced as a “contract”;

2. the provider country has given its PIC as an administrative decision granting a right to use genetic

resources under speciﬁc conditions;

3. the user has not complied with ABS requirements of the provider country.

Common to all three situations is that we assume that the provider country has adopted access

legislation in accordance with CBD article 15 and NP article 6.

It may be difﬁcult to distinguish clearly between situation (1), where the relationship between the
provider and the user is based on a contract, and situation (2), where it is based on an administrative
decision. The starting point is that administrative decisions involve the exercise of public authority
and need a clear basis in legislation, while contracts are based on negotiation between the provider
and the user, and require the agreement of both. The problem to distinguish occurs where a public
authority enters into negotiations prior to establishing a beneﬁt-sharing arrangement, and where the
ﬁnal arrangement has elements of both an administrative decision and a contractual relationship.
Such problems are likely to occur when providers and users shall determine the modalities for beneﬁt
sharing. The law of the provider country forms the basis for determining whether there is a contract
or an administrative decision in such instances. It is important that the process for implementing
the NP encourages provider states to clarify whether their beneﬁt-sharing arrangements are to be
regarded as contracts or as administrative decisions.

The topic in the following is to examine how the above three situations would fare under the
current legal regime in Norway. Our objective is to identify the reasonable elements that need to be
included in national implementation measures in user countries in order to ensure effective beneﬁt
sharing. We will ask how a provider country could secure its interests in each of the three situations by
relying on the ABS provisions of the Norwegian Nature Diversity Act and Patent Act, as described

390

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

above, in the context of the Norwegian legal regime. This provides a practical legal point of view—
that of an attorney of law in Norway preparing a case before the courts on behalf of a provider
country. In other words: how can an attorney argue a case before a Norwegian court, and what might
be the outcome of court proceedings? Before turning to how a case would proceed before the courts,
we will look into some issues relating to out-of-court settlement.

Initial Awareness of a Potential Infringement
The ﬁrst challenge the provider country faces is to become aware of the fact that a genetic resource
originating in that country is being utilized in Norway, as Norway’s ABS regime does not provide
any guarantee that a relevant provider country will be so informed. Where the user has agreed to
an ABS contract (situation 1) and where the provider country has issued an administrative decision
concerning future use of the genetic resource (situation 2), the provider country has an independent
opportunity to keep track of the use of the genetic resources. However, neither the provider country
nor Norwegian ofﬁcials would necessarily be aware of relevant use of a genetic resource in Norway.
In general, the use of a genetic resource has no obvious external veriﬁable manifestations that would
be controllable by either government. The provider country could detect such use only (1) where the
contractual obligation or administrative decision requires reporting back to the provider country
and provides a possibility of inspection, or (2) where Norwegian authorities engage in oversight
activities, including reporting to the provider country. If the private user has failed to comply with
provider-country requirements (situation 3), the Norwegian disclosure requirements (section 60 of
the Nature Diversity Act, section 8b of the Patent Act and section 4(3) of the Act relating to the Plant
Breeder’s Right) are unlikely to compete with the private user’s incentive not to disclose the origin of
the material, as long as the systems of control and sanctions in Norway remain ineffective.

The above challenges could be addressed on the basis of user-country measures to be taken in
accordance with articles 15–17 of the NP. One option for implementation could be for Norway to
establish a framework under which users of genetic materials are faced with the burden of proving
that their use of the genetic materials is not subject to any beneﬁt-sharing obligations. The NP
does not provide for such a speciﬁc rule, but user countries could adopt such a rule in order to
fulﬁl their obligations under the Protocol. It would be hard to imagine such a framework without
basing it on international cooperation, in particular through information sharing. Such a system is
envisaged under article 17 of the NP, which provides for “internationally recognized certiﬁcates of
compliance”. This would be a signiﬁcant means for users to ensure recognition as ABS-compliant
entities. The system of checkpoints as envisaged in NP article 17 could operate to provide both the
user and the countries with signiﬁcant opportunities to document compliance. Legislation adopted
by a user country that places the burden of proof on the user of genetic resources would signiﬁcantly
strengthen the effectiveness of the measures envisaged in article 17 of the NP.

Enforcement Outside the Norwegian Court System
Supposing that the provider country has overcome the challenge of identifying a user who is in
violation of obligations according to a contract, an administrative decision of the provider country
or the legislation of the provider country, it must next embark on the process of turning that
information into enforceable rights to beneﬁts. The provider country could take enforcement actions
against a user under its own legal system, provided that it has jurisdiction over activities or assets of
the user. Where the user has no assets or activities in the provider country, that country has limited
avenues for forcing the user to share beneﬁts. It could seek to enforce a favourable domestic decision
through the Norwegian justice system (see section 46 of the Norwegian Act relating to the Courts
of Justice, 1915). Establishing a corporate structure with different limited companies conducting

C(cid:2) 391

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

collection activities in the provider country and commercial activities in the user country could limit
the possibility of a provider country to force the user to share beneﬁts.

Section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act does not state any substantive obligation to share beneﬁts
with the provider country. Current Norwegian legislation does not make beneﬁt-sharing obligations
according to foreign court decisions enforceable in Norway (see section 19-16 of the Disputes Act,
2005 no. 90). Irrespective of whether the provider country gives its consent in an administrative
decision or through a contract, such instruments will not be directly enforceable in Norway.

Provider countries that make access dependent on ABS contracts would have a clear advantage,
since such contractual obligations can frequently be enforced in other jurisdictions. A contract would
be binding as long as it is not found to be void, and could, depending on the dispute settlement clause
included in the contract, be brought to arbitration. The decision of an arbitration tribunal could be
subject to subsequent enforcement in domestic legal systems.22

Bringing the User to a Norwegian Court
Access to Courts for Plaintiffs from Another Country
In order to bring a case to court in Norway, the plaintiff must, in addition to deﬁning a case or cause
of action on which a court can decide, meet three general conditions:

1. The plaintiff must have capacity to sue: section 2-1 of the Dispute Act (2005 no. 90) lists the entities
that have the capacity to sue and be sued before a court in Norway. Foreigners and their states are
not mentioned explicitly, but it must be assumed that they have the same capacity to sue before
Norwegian courts as do Norwegians and Norwegian public authorities.23 The main reservation
in this context is that disputes concerning international matters “may only be brought before the
Norwegian courts if the facts of the case have a sufﬁciently strong connection to Norway.”24 If
the use that triggers a beneﬁt-sharing obligation takes place in Norway, and there is a sufﬁcient
legal basis in the Norwegian legal system for bringing a case, we may assume that the case has a
sufﬁciently strong connection to Norway. The legal basis may be contractual obligations or action
on the section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act, see immediately below.

2. The object of the dispute must be subject to a legal claim: under Norwegian law, only “legal
claims” can be brought before a court.25 A claim is considered to be legal where it meets certain
standards. In particular, the claim must have a “legal basis”.26 This requirement is easily met
where the claimant has a contract and can show a breach of contractual terms (situation 1). If,
however, the case is based on the user’s violation of a foreign administrative decision (situation 2),
the existence of a valid “legal claim” is less obvious, and the result is much less certain. A beneﬁt-
sharing claim brought under such circumstances would have to depend on the existence of a legal
basis in Norwegian legislation. Arguably, such a legal basis exists in the second sentence of section
60(1) of the Nature Diversity Act: “The person that has control of the material is bound by the
conditions that have been set for consent.”27 The preparatory works underline that this sentence
implies that the user has a legal duty “according to Norwegian law”28. Whether there exists a
legal basis where the genetic material has been accessed in violation of the access legislation in the
provider country (situation 3) is more uncertain. In such situations, it can be argued that there
is no “consent” or related conditions, and thus that the second sentence of section 60(1) of the
Nature Diversity Act is inapplicable. The Act refers to foreign access legislation, but it does only
establish a duty to import genetic material to Norway in accordance with the legislation of the
provider country; it does not give the foreign act as such validity under Norwegian jurisdiction.
Thus, import of genetic material without complying with access legislation is illegal, and such
illegal import can be prosecuted by Norwegian authorities under sections 69, 73 and 75 of the
Act. On the one hand, it can therefore be argued that the lack of explicit consent means that

392

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

providers or the provider country have no legal basis for bringing the case before a Norwegian
court. Moreover, it can be argued that the fact that section 60 speciﬁcally refers to consent, whereas
legislation is not mentioned, implies that the lawmaker has intended to make a difference: the
individually determined consent is made binding under Norwegian law, but foreign legislation
is not. Arguably, this makes sense in terms of legal certainty for the user of genetic material, as
access legislation in general does not specify conditions for accessing the material. On the other
hand, it can be argued that the user of genetic material has implicitly agreed to conditions set
out in provider-country legislation by importing the material or making use of it, and that such
implicit agreement would sufﬁce as a legal basis according to the second sentence of section 60(1).
Moreover, it can be argued that a user of genetic materials should not be rewarded for not seeking
explicit consent before importing genetic materials to Norway. While it remains unclear whether a
sufﬁcient legal basis would exist in these situations, it is our opinion that Norwegian courts would
be unlikely to ﬁnd in favour of the provider or the provider country, should such a case arise.

3. The claimant must “show a genuine need to have the claim determined against the defendant”29:
this requirement implies that the person bringing the case must have a sufﬁciently close connection
to the case. The provider and the provider country would generally fulﬁl this requirement. The
requirement would probably prevent a Norwegian non-governmental organization (NGO) from
bringing a user to court with a provider country as the intended beneﬁciary. Norwegian case law
mostly supports the right of access to justice for NGOs where they promote common interests.
Case law does not provide a basis for arguing that NGOs have a sufﬁciently strong interest in
bringing cases on behalf of a provider or provider country. However, a possibility for bringing
a case may exist where ABS falls within the objectives of the NGO as set out in its constituting
documents and where the legal claim concerns the duties of the user and not the rights of the
provider or the provider state.

Cases Based on Section 60(1) of the Nature Diversity Act
The third sentence of section 60(1) states that: “The state may enforce the conditions by bringing
legal action on behalf of the person that set them”. Hence, the Norwegian government can enforce
provider-country conditions through legal action on behalf of the provider country or relevant
private party. A possibly limiting factor concerns the reference to “conditions”. The preparatory
works indicate that the form in which the “conditions” are stated is not decisive for the government’s
ability to bring a case. Statements in the preparatory works clearly indicate that relevant conditions
may follow from administrative decisions of the provider country (situation 2).30 Where the genetic
materials have been accessed in violation of provider-country legislation, and no speciﬁc conditions
have been established in a contract or an administrative decision (situation 3), it remains unclear
whether the Norwegian government can bring a case to Norwegian courts on behalf of the provider
or the provider country. This issue is parallel to the one discussed immediately above. One difference
is the more speciﬁc reference to persons having set “conditions”. However, the provision does not
rule out the possibility that conditions could be set directly through legislation and that a case thus
could be brought to the beneﬁt of the country that has adopted the legislation. The preparatory
works support such an interpretation as it refers to the foreign legislation, but the reference does not
explicitly resolve the issue.31 Such an interpretation would also be in line with our conclusion above.
The English translation of section 60 indicates that the provider country or relevant private party
must to some extent be involved in the claim, since the action must be brought on behalf of them.
However, the translation is somewhat misleading on this point, since the Norwegian version only
requires the action to be brought “to the advantage” of the person who set the conditions. As there is
no further comment on this issue in the preparatory works, we can assume that no strict requirements

C(cid:2) 393

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

concerning the involvement of the provider country or relevant private parties would apply if the
Norwegian government wanted to bring a case concerning beneﬁt sharing before a Norwegian court.
The Norwegian example shows that, to enable enforcement of beneﬁt sharing by national courts
in user countries, relevant national legislation must be adapted to identify and empower persons or
ofﬁcials to bring cases to court. While similar issues can be expected to arise in many user countries,
such legislation must be adapted to the court system of each user country. When implementing
the NP, countries need to consider how to facilitate access to the courts for non-nationals and
provide guidance on how contracts or administrative decisions can be formulated in order to enhance
opportunities for cross-border enforcement (see NP article 18).

It would be appropriate for Norwegian authorities to consult with relevant interested parties
in the provider country when considering whether to bring a case. Moreover, one might expect the
diplomatic or consular mission of the provider country to become involved. The decision on whether
a case shall be brought to court is at the discretion of the Norwegian government, but it seems
reasonable to expect Norwegian courts to reject a case where the provider or provider country has
expressed objections to having the case brought to court or to the way in which the case is presented.

Norwegian Courts—Addressing Substantive Issues
In the following, we look into various issues that might arise when a Norwegian court is asked
to resolve substantive issues regarding beneﬁt sharing. We focus on cases where the conditions for
beneﬁt sharing have been set out in contracts (situation 1) and administrative decisions (situation 2).
We shall deal with these two situations in parallel.

Validity: As we assume that issues concerning the validity of contractual obligations would fol-
low ordinary rules concerning validity of international contracts,32 our focus here will be restricted
to the validity of the provider country’s administrative decision. The problem arises when the de-
fendant claims that the decision setting out the beneﬁt-sharing conditions is invalid. The validity
of the decision must then be determined on the basis of the law of the provider country. Moreover,
according to rules under international law concerning state immunity, cases concerning the validity
of administrative decisions can be raised only before courts of the decision-making states.33 Hence,
a Norwegian court must reject any claim concerning the invalidity of the administrative decision in
question. The question is thus whether a Norwegian court can (or would) contribute to enforcement
of a foreign administrative decision in a case where the validity of the decision is contested. On the
one hand, a Norwegian court can be assumed to remain reluctant to pronounce on the validity of a
foreign administrative decision, and thus be likely to reject the case for lack of jurisdiction—either
on the basis of state immunity34 or applying the Norwegian version of the principle of forum non
conveniens.35 On the other hand, rejection of cases on such grounds would in practice make section 60
of the Nature Diversity Act entirely ineffective in cases concerning administrative decisions. Norwe-
gian courts are thus likely to be faced with the dilemma of having to choose between rejecting the case
for lack of jurisdiction and deciding the case on the basis of an assumption that the administrative
decision is valid even though the Norwegian respondent challenges its validity or applicability. A
third possibility could be to make a request to the appropriate authorities or courts of the provider
country in order to get an authoritative statement concerning the validity of the administrative de-
cision. However, in the absence of agreement between Norway and provider countries concerning
recognition of decisions of courts or administrative authorities, which is the case for most potential
provider countries, Norwegian courts are unlikely to resort to such an option. Against this back-
ground, it can be argued that there is a need to develop mechanisms for recognition of administrative
decisions of provider countries as part of the implementation of the NP.

394

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Interpretation of foreign administrative decisions: Norwegian courts may be faced with difﬁcult
interpretive issues when fulﬁlling their role under section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act. The starting
point would be the wording of the decision, which should in general be interpreted in light of the rel-
evant provider country legislation. These tasks are signiﬁcantly facilitated through the establishment
of lists of National Contact Points to ABS and of Competent National Authorities on ABS under
the CBD.36 However, there are still many countries not represented on these lists, and signiﬁcant
challenges related to interpreting the decisions and provider country legislation might remain despite
the availability of relevant contact persons. Moreover, given the fact that Norwegian authorities are
most likely to initiate cases on behalf of provider countries that lack resources to enforce the deci-
sions themselves (least developed countries in particular), one might fear that the authorities in these
countries may lack resources to respond appropriately to requests from the Norwegian authorities;
moreover, the relevant decisions and legislation may reﬂect legal traditions signiﬁcantly different
from those of the Norwegian legal system. Examples could be how local custom and the interests of
indigenous communities should be addressed. In many cases, there might be signiﬁcant uncertainty
related to the interpretation of administrative decisions in light of provider-country legislation. There
is thus a need to focus on capacity building of national contact points and competent national author-
ities, so that they may contribute as effectively as possible to clarifying the content of conditions set
out in provider-country administrative decisions. Such capacity-building efforts could also focus on
enabling national contact points and competent national authorities to provide evidence concerning
the validity of such decisions.

Interpretation of contracts: While the validity of ABS contracts might not give rise to issues
of particular concern, it may be relevant to discuss whether the interpretation and application of
such contracts would raise issues of particular concern. We may identify four main concerns in this
context: (1) ABS is an unknown legal concept among judges in Norway, and there might be little
understanding of the underlying rationale of the contract. (2) ABS will relate to technical questions
of biotechnology, gene technology or a related technical ﬁeld. Judges are trained in law and very
seldom in biology or even less in these technical ﬁelds, the understanding of which might be essential
for an appropriate interpretation of the contract. (3) Until now, there has, to our knowledge, been a
complete absence of jurisprudence for ABS contracts, as no court in any country has ever interpreted
a contract that has been characterized as an ABS contract. The absence of jurisprudence might
create a challenge for the initial cases, as it adds to the other challenges facing judges in this area. (4)
As the contracts will be established on the basis of requirements in provider-country legislation, an
understanding of the legislation might be essential for interpretation of the contractual obligations.
Hence, similar issues to those identiﬁed above concerning interpretation of administrative decisions
are likely to arise when courts interpret contracts. There might be signiﬁcant uncertainty related to
the interpretation of contracts in light of provider-country legislation in some cases. Against this
background, it will be of importance during the implementation of article 19 of the NP to encourage
more extensive and consistent use of standard contracts, frequently referred to as “standard material
transfer agreements”, and to encourage effective involvement of national contact points in contractual
issues.

Applying law to the facts: If Norwegian courts can overcome the difﬁculties of interpreting
administrative decisions or contracts, they will then face challenges in applying the law to the facts.
Norwegian courts will in general have no particular difﬁculties with regard to establishing facts
related to Norway, including assessing the beneﬁts arising from the use of genetic resources in
Norway. However, there might be signiﬁcant problems in establishing facts that take place within
other countries. Such problems might concern, inter alia, determining the exact function of the
genetic material in question in relation to the contested use, claims by the defendant that similar

C(cid:2) 395

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

genetic materials from a number of different sources have been used in developing the product in
question, and disagreement between the defendant and the provider country regarding how the
genetic material has been collected. Although such problems may be signiﬁcant, it can be argued
that similar problems would arise in any case involving transborder elements, and that problems of
clarifying the facts of the case will have to be resolved on an individual basis, taking into account the
framework for cooperation between the relevant authorities. The NP provides for limited guidance
in this respect, but national contact points could play an important role. There is also a need for
capacity building, for example, in the form of an explanatory guide to the NP.

Enforcement of the decision: Ensuring effective beneﬁt sharing based on a decision by a Norwegian
court might involve some additional challenges. Such challenges depend on whether beneﬁt sharing
is to take place on the basis of contractual terms or terms set out in an administrative decision, and
on the nature of the beneﬁts to be shared—in particular, whether the beneﬁts are economic, including
monetary or not (see the annex to the NP). We may assume that issues concerning non-monetary
beneﬁts to be shared in the context of sample collection or the use of private or public land will
be resolved within the provider country. Such beneﬁts may include deposits of samples of genetic
materials found, information sharing and research cooperation. Due to the close relationship between
bioprospecting activities and such beneﬁts, as well as problems associated with business secrets and
conﬁdentiality, it would not be reasonable for user-country courts to intervene to secure such beneﬁt
sharing. Hence, claims relating to such beneﬁt sharing are likely to be rejected on the basis of forum
non conveniens or similar rules.37 However, there might be exceptions: for example, where it appears
that the user has made more extensive searches for genetic material than those provided for in the
contract and the provider country has few possibilities to ensure effective beneﬁt sharing on the basis
of the activities that have actually taken place.

In cases concerning contractual obligations, it can be noted that most ABS contracts available for
review include provisions under which users transfer monetary or other economic beneﬁts (Young,
2009). As such beneﬁt sharing will generally depend on the beneﬁts actually generated in user
countries, it would be reasonable to expect Norwegian courts to address such beneﬁt-sharing claims.
Even where the beneﬁts to be shared have been set out in terms of payments for access to the
genetic resource and where the user has failed to meet such an obligation, it can be argued that it is
appropriate for Norwegian courts to deal with the case so that beneﬁt sharing based on the claim
can be enforced.

Court actions relating to enforcement of administrative decisions give rise to some additional
problems. While claims based on contracts in Norway and in many other countries can be adjusted on
the basis of arguments related to the reasonableness of the terms of the contracts,38 there is no similar
legal basis for adjusting claims based on the reasonableness of the terms of administrative decisions
of other countries. The ﬁnding of a Norwegian court that certain conditions in an administrative
decision of another country cannot be applied due to their unreasonableness would be in conﬂict with
international comity, and potentially also with the immunity of the state in question. Hence, where a
Norwegian court is faced with an argument that the administrative decision cannot be enforced due
to its unreasonableness, it can be argued that the court should reject the case. On the other hand,
such an approach would enable defendants to prevent Norwegian courts from dealing with beneﬁt-
sharing claims based on foreign administrative decisions. Against this background, it can be argued
that Norwegian courts should not be prevented from addressing cases where the reasonableness of
an administrative decision is contested, since such a decision would not directly rule on the validity
of the administrative decision: it would merely determine whether the Norwegian legal system could
be used to enforce the administrative decision. In our view, considerable uncertainty attends how

396

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

such a case would fare in Norwegian courts, and it would be good if such problems could be dealt
with in the context of the implementation of the NP.

A Norwegian court might also be faced with a “legal personality” question: Who is legally
entitled to receive the beneﬁts? Normally, this question will be decided when Norwegian authorities
deﬁne the claim to be brought forward. The question of whether beneﬁts are to be transferred to a
government or other legal or physical persons within the provider country is not resolved in detail
in the NP, as provider countries enjoy signiﬁcant freedom in determining how the beneﬁts shall be
distributed among stakeholders [see in particular articles 5(2), 5(5), 8 and 9]. The basis for deﬁning
the right holder must therefore be the administrative decision or the contract, and a Norwegian
court must make its decision on this basis. Any subsequent disagreement relating to the ultimate
beneﬁciaries, such as whether and how funds are to be made available to indigenous communities,
should be determined by the legal system of the provider country.

Effects of a Norwegian case for potential cases within other countries: Finally, it can be asked
whether a case concerning beneﬁt sharing brought by Norwegian authorities against a user before a
Norwegian court would prevent the provider country or other interested parties from bringing the
same or similar claims against the same user in the courts of the provider country or in other countries
(the user’s home country in particular). The answer depends on the national rules of the country in
which the parallel claim is brought, and, where relevant, on treaties between this country and Norway.
The Norwegian case would be brought by Norwegian authorities “to the advantage of the person
that set” the beneﬁt-sharing conditions (section 60 of the Nature Diversity Act). The problem arises
if the provider country or other interested parties are dissatisﬁed with the way in which Norwegian
authorities and courts deal with their case. It can be argued that a provider country or other interested
parties should have broad opportunities to bring parallel proceedings. In general, arguments based
on res judicata would apply only where the case is between the same parties. Depending on the rules of
the country in question, parallel proceedings might be resolved in different ways. Some legal systems
might reject the new case on the basis of res judicata, whereas other systems might accept the whole
case or selected claims. Regardless, it would not seem reasonable for a court to reject a case on the
basis of res judicata where the claimant has a reasonable claim that Norwegian authorities and courts
have not dealt appropriately with important aspects of that case.

Enforcement of a Judgment from Another Country
The provider country or other interested parties might seek to avoid some of the uncertainties and
challenges described above by obtaining a verdict on their beneﬁt-sharing claim in the provider
country, and subsequently seek enforcement of this verdict in Norway. While there exist various
treaties on the recognition of foreign judgments,39 such treaties are in general regional and/or subject
speciﬁc. Hence, these rules are in practice not relevant to the recognition of foreign judgments
concerning beneﬁt sharing.40

Whether Norwegian authorities or courts will contribute to enforcement of foreign courts’
decisions on beneﬁt sharing will thus in practice be a matter of Norwegian law. According to section
4-1(2)(f) of the Act relating to Enforcement of Claims (no. 86, 1992) and section 19-16 of the Dispute
Act (no. 90, 2005), enforcement of a foreign judgment would require legal basis in a Norwegian Act.
As there exists no such legal basis of relevance, a foreign judgment concerning beneﬁt sharing cannot
be enforced through the Norwegian legal system. Against this background, it would be of interest
to consider developing a common instrument to encourage general recognition of foreign judgments
and arbitral awards, as a coordinated effort to ensure effective implementation of article 18(3)(b) of
the NP.

C(cid:2) 397

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Some Concluding Remarks—Lessons from Norwegian User-Country Legislation
Relevant for Implementation of the NP
The above thought experiment has shown that Norwegian legislation, hailed as the most advanced
regime of user-country measures (Morgera and Tsioumani, 2010, pp. 156–7), is in fact far from
resolving all the issues relevant and necessary for creation of an effective beneﬁt-sharing system.
This is not necessarily due to any failure on the part of the Norwegian government, which has taken
serious and important steps that will at least enable and mandate greater attention to user side issues
within Norway. When it comes to implementing ABS and the NP in a functional way, however, it is
clear that the legislature of one country, acting on its own, cannot resolve all the challenges relating
to enforcement of ABS obligations towards users within its jurisdiction.

The Norwegian regime for ABS has introduced some suitable and potentially effective instru-
ments to assist in the implementation of the access legislation of provider countries. While the regime
is new and its effectiveness in practice thus cannot yet be determined, we have in this article indicated
certain weaknesses and opportunities inherent in the regime. Especially important is the observa-
tion that the effectiveness of the Norwegian regime depends on three main factors: (1) It needs to
be followed up through the establishment of effective administrative procedures. (2) It depends on
coordination and cooperation with provider countries, which can be greatly enhanced through im-
plementation of the NP. (3) To some extent, it also depends on coordination and cooperation with
other user countries and their willingness to implement similar regimes. This latter point is illustrated
by recent developments in the patent regime, whereby obligations in Norwegian legislation will lose
effect through the possibility of ﬁling patent applications through the PCT or EPO systems.

As demonstrated through the above analysis, the effectiveness of the ABS regime will largely
depend on two types of international mechanisms: mechanisms using networks of national contact
points and multilateral “clearing houses” for information sharing, including mechanisms to ensure
capacity building; and agreed legal and soft law (NP article 20) mechanisms to ensure coordination
of national legal regimes. Such mechanisms can take up the challenges identiﬁed above, but not
necessarily resolve them.

The functionality of ABS and the success of the NP will depend on creating incentives that
encourage users to participate. This remains a challenge also after the NP has been agreed and moves
into its implementation phase. One important issue concerns the modalities to be chosen for the
Global Multilateral Beneﬁt-Sharing Mechanism (NP article 10). Such a mechanism can contribute
considerably to the volume of beneﬁt sharing—but it can also undermine the role of provider-
country access legislation, thereby also undermining provider countries’ perception of the fairness
and equitability of the ABS regime.

The three situations studied (contracts, administrative decisions and violation of provider country
legislation) raise distinct and different challenges for making an ABS regime functional. These
distinctions are reﬂected in the text of the NP and will be central when implementing it in domestic
legislation. Model contractual clauses, as prescribed in article 19, will be important to assist user
countries seeking to enable the enforcement of contracts between providers and users within their
judicial system. The judicial systems of user countries cannot resolve all beneﬁt-sharing issues.
Particular problems arise in relation to administrative decisions and violation of provider-country
legislation. There is consequently signiﬁcant need for establishing a multilateral mechanism to ensure
mutual recognition of foreign judgments and arbitral awards and work to implement the rules of the
NP into national functional legal system.

398

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

About the Authors
Morten Walløe Tvedt is Senior Research Fellow at the Fridtjof Nansen Institute, P.O. Box 326, 1326
Lysaker, Norway; e-mail: mwt@fni.no. Tvedt has published extensively on intellectual property and
biological resources law (see www.fni.no for complete publication list). His major work in the area
of CBD is Beyond Access: Exploring Implementation of the Fair and Equitable Sharing Commitment
in the CBD, written together with Tomme Young [IUCN Environmental Policy and Law Paper No.
67/1 (available in English, Spanish and French). IUCN Environmental Law Centre, Bonn Germany].
Ole Kristian Fauchald is Senior Research Fellow at the Fridtjof Nansen Institute and professor dr.
juris at the University of Oslo. Fauchald has published on international and Norwegian environmental
law, international trade law and international investment law. He is co-editor-in-chief of the Yearbook
of International Environmental Law. Fauchald may be contacted at: okf@fni.no or by mail to the
Fridtjof Nansen Institute, P.O. Box 326, 1326 Lysaker, Norway.

Notes
This article is part of a research project on Access and Beneﬁt Sharing carried out in cooperation with the multi-
donor ABS Capacity Development Initiative for Africa. The Initiative is organized by the Deutsche Gesellschaft
f¨ur Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). The work at the FNI is supported by the Norwegian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and carried out in cooperation with the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Institut
de l’´energie et de l’environnement de la Francophonie (IEPF). For further details, see http://www.fni.no/
projects/abs_capacity_development_africa.html.

1 Terminology may create confusion in an article dealing with both the international level of ABS (the
relationship of the countries as “Contracting Parties”) and the private level (the relationships between the
“parties to a contract”). Accordingly, countries that are Contracting Parties to the CBD and to the NP
are here referred to as “countries”, and participants in an individual ABS relationship are referred to as
“parties to the ABS contract”.

2 The deﬁnition of “genetic resources” is one of the legal problems associated with implementing a functional
ABS system; see Schei and Tvedt, 2010. “Genetic material” is found within biological material, and most
biological material may be moved across national boundaries legally without prior informed consent or
mutually agreed terms, save some exceptions for species that are thought to be dangerous (dangerous
or poisonous animals, plant pests, narcotic substances, biological weapons, etc.) or endangered, whose
international movement is sometimes prohibited. Once one has a specimen in hand, a user’s activities are
often not monitored, or are very difﬁcult to monitor by external or government observers.

3 A detailed analysis of the question of “legal certainty” was undertaken in 2005: IUCN Canada. “Summary
Analysis: Legal Certainty for Users of Genetic Resources under Existing Access and Beneﬁt-sharing (ABS)
Legislation and Policy”, distributed at AHWG-ABS-3 as UNEP/CBD/WGABS/3/INF10, which noted
that: “The [best] ways to enhance legal certainty for users . . . are to balance that need against the sovereign
obligations of providers need for certainty”.

4 Based on personal observations during the negotiations of the NP.
5 An English version of the Act is available at http://www.regjeringen.no/en/doc/Laws/Acts/nature-

diversity-act.html?id=570549 [Accessed February 2011].

6 An English version of the Patent Act is available at http://www.patentstyret.no/patentsact [Accessed

February 2011].

7 An English version of

is available at
http://www.ub.uio.no/ujur/ulovdata/lov-19930312-032-eng.pdf [Accessed February 2011]. Note that this
translation has not been updated with the relevant provision on disclosure.

relating to the Plant Breeder’s Right

the Act

C(cid:2) 399

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

8 Ot.prp 52, 2008–9, p. 312.
9 Ibid., at 311.
10 There is currently no English-language version of the webpage of the Norwegian Ofﬁce of the Attorney

General, see http://www.regjeringsadvokaten.no/ [Accessed February 2011].

11 See http://www.cbd.int/doc/lists/nfp-abs.pdf [Accessed February 2011].
12 See sections 24–32 of the Act, an English version of which is available at http://www.ub.uio.no/

ujur/ulovdata/lov-19670210-000-eng.pdf [Accessed February 2011].

13 The English version of the Code is available at http://www.ub.uio.no/ujur/ulovdata/lov-19020522-

010-eng.pdf [Accessed February 2011].

14 Section 8b states the following: “If an invention concerns or uses biological material or traditional knowl-
edge, the patent application shall include information on the country from which the inventor collected
or received the material or the knowledge (the providing country). If it follows from the national law in
the providing country that access to biological material or use of traditional knowledge shall be subject to
prior consent, the application shall state whether such consent has been obtained.
If the providing country is not the same as the country of origin of the biological material or the traditional
knowledge, the application shall also state the country of origin. For biological material, the country of
origin means the country from which the material was collected from its natural environment and, for tra-
ditional knowledge, the country in which the knowledge was developed. If the national law in the country
of origin requires that access to biological material or the use of traditional knowledge shall be subject to
prior consent, the application shall state whether such consent has been obtained. If the information set
out in this subsection is not known, the applicant shall state that.
For biological material, the duty to disclose information under the ﬁrst and second paragraphs applies
even where the inventor has altered the structure of the received material. The duty to disclose information
does not apply to biological material derived from the human body. If access to biological material has
been provided in pursuance of article 12.2 and article 12.3 of the International Treaty of 3 November 2001
on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, a copy of the standard material transfer agreement
(MTA) stipulated in article 12.4 of the Treaty shall be enclosed with the patent application instead of the
information stipulated in the ﬁrst and second paragraphs”.

15 See section 40 of the General Civil Penal Code.
16 Patent Act § 8b, see also the EU Patent Directive that prohibits rejection of a patent application as a
consequence of not complying with the obligation: (1) non-compliance “has no effect for the proceeding
of the patent application”; and (2) lack of information shall not have any effect on the validity of a patent
after it has been granted.

17 In such cases, article 27 of the PCT prevents countries from imposing different or additional requirements
to the content of a patent application than those listed in that treaty: “National Requirements (1) No
national law shall require compliance with requirements relating to the form or contents of the inter-
national application different from or additional to those which are provided for in this Treaty and the
Regulations”.

18 The expectation was that the number of patent applications would decline from between 6,000 and 6,500
applications to between 1,300 and 1,400 applications; see St.prp. no. 35 (2006–7) concerning Norway’s
ratiﬁcation of the European Patent Convention (in Norwegian) at 34.
(cid:3)http://www.worldfuturecouncil.org/3454.html#c47432(cid:4) [Accessed March 2011].

19 Norway’s Nature Diversity Act was among six acts nominated for the Future Policy Award 2010: see

20 The 2003 amendment of the Patent Act was related to the decision of 31 January 2003 to include Directive
98/44/EC on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions in the Agreement on the European
Economic Area (1993). This was a highly controversial issue among political parties in Norway, and
section 8b of the Patent Act represented a signiﬁcant element of the political compromise.

400

C(cid:2) Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

21 The Committee preparing the Nature Diversity Act was established in April 2001; see NOU 2004:28

section 3.

22 For Norway, see sections 45 and 46 of the Arbitration Act (2004 no. 25).
23 See NOU 2001:32 Bind B, “Rett p˚a sak” p. 655. One topic that remains unclear is which conditions relating

to their ability to sue must be determined on the basis of Norwegian law.

24 See section 4-3 of the Dispute Act (2005 no. 90).
25 Section 1-3 of the Dispute Act (2005 no. 90).
26 Ibid.
27 See also section 59(5) of the Act, which concerns legal action in relation to intellectual property rights on

genetic material obtained from public collections.

28 See Ot.prp. no. 52 (2008–9) at 444.
29 Section 1-3(2) of the Dispute Act (2005 no. 90).
30 See Ot.prp. no. 52 (2008–9) at 444.
31 Ibid.
32 There are no speciﬁc characteristics of beneﬁt-sharing contracts indicating that such contracts give rise to

issues or problems that distinguish such contracts from other contracts. See also Young, 2009.

33 See in particular articles 5 and 6 of the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States

and their Property (2004).

34 As the case would not be raised against the provider state, but in the interest of the provider state against
a private party, it can be asked whether a state immunity argument would be available to the defendant.
According to article 6.2(b) of the United Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and
their Property (2004), this depends on whether the “proceeding in effect seeks to affect the property,
rights, interests or activities of that other State”. On the Norwegian approach to state immunity, see Alvik,
2006.

35 See section 4-3(1) of the Dispute Act (2005 no. 90): “Disputes in international matters may only be brought
before the Norwegian courts if the facts of the case have a sufﬁciently strong connection to Norway”. On
the Norwegian rules, see Heimdal, 2008. For a discussion of the role of domestic courts in such cases, see
Benvenisti and Downs, 2009.
36 See(cid:3)http://www.cbd.int/doc/lists/nfp-abs.pdf(cid:4) and(cid:3)http://www.cbd.int/doc/lists/nfp-abs-cna.pdf(cid:4), re-

spectively [Accessed February 2011].

37 For Norway, see section 4-3 of the Dispute Act (no. 90, 2005).
38 For Norway, see section 36 of the Act relating to Conclusion of Agreements, etc. (31 May 1981 no. 4).
39 For an overview of relevant treaties, see (cid:3)http://www.jus.uio.no/english/services/library/treaties/

11/11-04/(cid:4) [Accessed March 2011].

40 The main exception is judgments originating in courts of a state party to the Lugano Convention on
Jurisdiction and the Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters (2007).
However, this Convention applies only in relations between some European states and would not be
relevant in most cases concerning beneﬁt sharing.

References
Alvik, I. (2006) ‘Statsimmunitet etter norsk rett og folkeretten’, in O. K. Fauchald, Henning Jakhelln and Aslak
Syse (eds), Festskrift til Carl August Fleischer, dog Fred er ej det Bedste . . . , Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, pp.
13–39.

Benvenisti, E. and Downs, G. W. (2009) ‘National Courts, Domestic Democracy, and the Evolution of Interna-

tional Law’, European Journal of International Law, 20(1), 59–72.

C(cid:2) 401

Morten W. Tvedt and Ole K. Fauchald

Measures for Implementing ABS and the Nagoya Protocol

Bavikatte, K. and Robinson, D. F. (2011) ‘Towards a People’s History of the Law: Biocultural Jurisprudence
and the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Beneﬁt Sharing’, 7/1 Law, Environment and Development Journal,
7(1), 35. Available at (cid:3)http://www.lead-journal.org/content/11035.pdf(cid:4).

Heimdal, L. A. (2008) ‘Kravet om tilstrekkelig tilknytning til Norge etter tvisteloven § 4–3 første ledd for ˚a

anlegge tvister i internasjonale forhold for norske domstoler’, Lov og Rett, 47(7), 407–16.

Morgera, E. and Tsioumani, E. (2010) ‘The Evolution of Beneﬁt Sharing: Linking Biodiversity and Community

Livelihoods’, Review of European Community & International Environmental Law, 19(2), 150–73.

Schei, P. J. and Tvedt, M. W. (2010) ‘Genetic Resources’

in the CBD: The Wording, the Past, the
Present and the Future, FNI Report 4/2010, Fridtjof Nansen Institute, Lysaker. Available at
(cid:3)http://www.fni.no/doc&pdf/FNI-R0410.pdf(cid:4) [Accessed March 2011].

Tvedt, M. W. (2006) ‘Elements for Legislation in User Countries to Meet the Fair and Equitable Beneﬁt-Sharing

Commitment’, , 9(2), 189–212.

Tvedt, M. W. (2011) A Report from the First Reﬂection Meeting on the Global Multilateral Beneﬁt-Sharing

Tvedt, M. W. and Rukundo, O. (2010) Functionality of an ABS Protocol, FNI Report 9/2010, Fridtjof Nansen

Mechanism, FNI Report 10/2011.FNI, Lysaker. 18 pp.
Institute, Lysaker. Available at (cid:3)http://www.fni.no/doc&pdf/FNI-R0910.pdf(cid:4) [Accessed March 2011].

Tvedt, M. W. and Young, T.

(2007) Beyond Access: Exploring Implementation of

the Fair and
IUCN, Gland. Available at

Equitable Sharing Commitment
in the CBD, ABS Series No. 2,
(cid:3)http://www.fni.no/doc&pdf/beyond_access.pdf(cid:4) [Accessed March 2011].

Young, T. R. (2009) ‘Applying Contract Law to ABS’, in S. Bhatti, Santiago Carrizosa, Patrick McGuire and
Tomme Young (eds), Contracting for ABS: The Legal and Scientiﬁc Implications of Bioprospecting, ABS Se-
ries no. 4, IUCN, Gland, pp. 39–78. Available at (cid:3)http://data.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/edocs/EPLP-067-4.pdf(cid:4)
[Accessed March 2011].

402

C(cid:2) 
