The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6, pp. 240–261

doi: 10.1002/jwip.12015

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade
Agreements: What Treaties, What Content?

Xavier Seuba
University of Strasbourg

Preferential trade agreements have become a major source of international intellectual property regulation. This paper
analyses the preferential trade agreements notiﬁed to the World Trade Organization and identiﬁes which among them
regulate intellectual property in a signiﬁcant manner, which is the level of development of treaty members, what the
general structure of the covenants is, what categories of intellectual property are covered and what areas of intellectual
property enforcement are addressed in each treaty. The objective is to present the wider picture, describe the
characteristics of intellectual property regulation via PTAs, and facilitate future research in particular areas of interest.
The analysis of the 141 PTAs that regulate intellectual property in a meaningful allows drawing the attention on
aspects such as the transplantation of intellectual property law and the increasingly detailed and demanding content of
the treaties, as well as observing other probably unexpected features, particularly concerning intellectual property
enforcement and the interests of developing countries.

Keywords TRIPS; bilateralism; free trade; developing countries

Preferential Trade Agreements as a Major Source of Intellectual Property Regulation
Intellectual property has become a common area of regulation in preferential trade agreements (PTAs).1
There are currently 141 treaties that address intellectual property in a signiﬁcant manner,2 although their
level of detail and the areas regulated greatly diverge. While some covenants only contain norms on
speciﬁc aspects of intellectual property law, others enshrine fairly complete statutes ready to be transposed
to national legislations. Moreover, the percentage of PTAs that do not deal with intellectual property or
that only contain vague or tangential references to it is rapidly decreasing, while the number of treaties that
annually enter into force and regulate intellectual property has dramatically risen.

For decades, intellectual property was not a relevant issue in trade negotiations, or at least it was not
the object of regulation in the context of PTAs. Trade agreements adopted between the 1950s and the late
1980s did not include provisions regulating intellectual property.3 In the majority of treaties, intellectual
property was only mentioned as an exception to trade liberalization principles, in line with what General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)4 article XX sets forth.5 This changed dramatically in the 1990s,
when a new wave of PTAs anticipated, coincided and followed the adoption of the World Trade
Organization Agreement (WTO) on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
Agreement).6 The wave has continuously grown and its in crescendo trend seems to not yet have reached
its peak (Figure 1).

The normative and policy implications of intellectual property provisions in PTAs have been
intensively studied,7 and the growing complexity of the interaction between PTAs and intellectual
property has attracted a very signiﬁcant attention. However, most of the research has focused on speciﬁc
areas of concern—particularly health, access to knowledge and agriculture—or has analyzed a limited
number of treaties.8 This paper aims to add to the already existing literature by contributing to the
identiﬁcation and comprehensive mapping of the intellectual property content of PTAs in force.

In order to fulﬁll this goal, a thorough examination of 256 PTAs notiﬁed to the WTO by March 2013
has been conducted. These treaties have been analyzed to determine which among them regulate

240

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

Figure 1. Number of treaties regulating IP entered into force each year. Since mid-1990s the quantity of PTAs containing signiﬁcant
intellectual property obligations has increased exponentially. The ﬁnal drop in the chart merely reﬂects the fact that many treaties
concluded in 2009, 2010 and 2011 have not yet entered into force

intellectual property in a signiﬁcant manner, which is the level of development of the countries that
conclude said treaties, what the general structure of the covenants is, what categories of intellectual
property are covered and what areas of intellectual property enforcement are addressed in each treaty.
The objective is to present the wider picture and facilitate future research. Although the numerous and
intricate legal challenges arising from PTAs are not addressed, this is not merely a quantitative or
descriptive tool. The criteria chosen to select the treaties and analyze its content permit inferring relevant
conclusions. The number of treaties addressing speciﬁc institutions, when have these treaties been adopted
and which are the countries involved, capture the trends and goals of international intellectual property
negotiation at the bilateral—and frequently also multilateral—level.

Sample of Research

The World Trade Organization Regional Trade Agreements Information-System
The WTO Regional Trade Agreements Information-System (RTA-IS)9 is a database containing all the
agreements that have been notiﬁed to the Organization, and permits dynamic search according to a set of
selected criteria. The RTA-IS database, as displayed in the WTO web page as of March 2013, has been the
main source of information to conduct the present analysis. “Intellectual property” was selected among the
options offered in the search engine of the RTA-IS database. This selection delivered the preliminary
group of 116 treaties object of this research.10 However, that sample of research was not exhaustive
enough. Other relevant treaties notiﬁed to the WTO were not displayed in the RTA-IS when “intellectual
property” was chosen as parameter. This made necessary to explore the entire list of PTAs notiﬁed to the
WTO. This means that 256 PTAs displayed when no substantive areas of regulation are selected in the
search engine have been object of analysis.11

There are 34 PTAs notiﬁed to the WTO that, in our view, regulate intellectual property regardless of
the fact that the RTA-IS does not count them as treaties dealing with intellectual property.12 This may be
due to several reasons, ranging from simple omissions to more restrictive criteria on the side of the WTO
RTA-IS. With respect to the latter, it has to be noticed, however, that the criteria followed in the present
research to decide whether a PTA should be counted as an “intellectual property” treaty seem to be more
restrictive that the criteria adopted by the WTO.

Discrepancies have been found not only with regard to treaties not listed in the WTO RTA-IS but also
with respect to treaties listed therein. Some covenants identiﬁed by the RTA-IS as treaties regulating
intellectual property are considered, in this research, not to be related with intellectual property. This is the

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

241

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

case of 9 PTAs.13 One possible explanation to this discrepancy relates to the criteria followed to select
treaties. Our criteria include ﬁve negative parameters which determine that, even when intellectual
property is mentioned in the PTA, the treaty is not included among treaties object of analysis. Full details
on which are these criteria are given below, but they revolve around the generality of the reference to
intellectual property contained in the PTA: if the reference is too vague, the treaty has not been considered
relevant. In other cases, however, the discrepancy with the WTO RTA-IS responds to the fact that no
reference at all to intellectual property has been found in the covenant selected in the WTO RTA-IS as
regulating intellectual property.14

Previous Estimates
A WTO Staff Working Paper on “Intellectual property provisions in regional trade agreements” was
released when an earlier version of the present
investigation had been ﬁnalized (Valde´s and
Tavengwa, 2012). The WTO Staff Working Paper is the ﬁrst document to offer such a complete and
broad perspective on the intellectual property content of regional trade agreements.

The WTO Staff Working Paper and this study have several commonalities in terms of research
interests and outcomes, although notable differences do also exist. Among the shared points, it is worth
noting that both studies analyze the same sources (PTAs) and have identiﬁed and researched similar and
sometimes coincidental criteria. Moreover, both take as source of information the WTO RTA-IS and seem
to share the perception that it was necessary to offer a comprehensive view on the current mapping of
PTAs regulating intellectual property. There are, however, also notable differences.

The number of PTA considered to regulate intellectual property in both studies differs. In line with
what was commented above with regard the WTO RTA-IS, an important number of treaties (25) are, in our
view, relevant as far as the protection of intellectual property is concerned. However, these treaties have
not been included in the WTO Staff Working Paper as treaties regulating intellectual property.15

Other differences relate to the speciﬁc content searched within the treaties. While sharing several
points of interest, the selected area of concern differs. While the WTO Staff Working Paper has analyzed
in great depth the provisions affecting public health, we focus the attention in the area of intellectual
property enforcement. Another difference relates to the criteria searched into the treaties, which have been
more numerous in the WTO Working Paper. This concerns both intellectual property categories
searched16 and cross-cutting principles.17 Another difference concerns the fact that the present analysis
does not try to classify treaties with regard its content and distinguish them into more or less severe
treaties. Finally, the criteria to classify countries have also been different and, for the reasons explained
below, we have privileged the United Nations Development Program Human Development Index.

Criteria Adopted to Include Treaties in the Sample of Research

In order to identify the PTAs that regulate intellectual property, treaties that effectively mention it but are
too general or only contain tangential or indirect references have been excluded. The intended outcome is
to show a those treaties that meaningfully regulate intellectual property. In order to achieve this goal, a
restrictive stance based on the following exclusions has been adopted.

A ﬁrst exclusion is that of treaties that only mention intellectual property as an exception to trade
liberalization, in line with GATT article XX(d).18 A provision of this type is found in the majority of
PTAs,19 and it is indeed a very important clause that enables the adoption of statutes on intellectual
property regardless of its trade restrictive effects. Nevertheless, the understanding of intellectual property
as a legitimate exception to free trade is probably already a customary norm, and the inclusion of all the
treaties that allude to intellectual property as admissible derogation to free trade would mask the outcomes
of the research.20

242

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

Another exclusion from the selected covenants concerns treaties where intellectual property is only
mentioned in the investment or competition chapters, to, respectively, state that it is one among the
protected investments21 and that it is not considered a monopoly.22 The growing importance of these
provisions renders this decision disputable. Indeed, norms on investment alluding to intellectual property
are increasingly used by rightholders to defend their interests,23 something which already caused concern
years ago (Correa 2004b, p. 331; 2004c). The decision to exclude them from this work, however, responds
to the objective of focusing as much as possible the research in intellectual property regulation, and not in
intermediate areas of intellectual property and trade, competition or investment.

Additionally, PTAs that only allude to TRIPS reafﬁrming the commitments adopted in TRIPS have
also been excluded.24 Although general references to TRIPS may have relevance to attract TRIPS disputes
to the bilateral dispute settlement system (Burrell and Weatherall, 2008, p. 265; Seuba, 2013a, p. 417) this
does not change the substantive protection that must be offered: by deﬁnition, parties to the PTA were
already parties to TRIPS. This is, however, different in the case of treaties where at least one of the parties
could still beneﬁt from TRIPS transitory periods, which have been included in the database.25 In this case,
the reference to TRIPS does indeed change the normative situation. Finally, treaties that only include a
general reference to the cooperation on intellectual property have also been excluded.26 In all cases, it has
been understood that, to reﬁne the research and better focus our analysis, it was more useful excluding than
including them.

With regard to the satisfaction of the selected criteria, covenants containing indirect references to the
selected topics have not been considered relevant. The case of treaties concluded by the European Union
with countries aspiring to become members of the Union deserves particular mention. These agreements
include the commitment to respect, in a short-term, a level of protection equivalent to that found in the
European Union.27 It can be held that this obligation implies that all intellectual property categories or
enforcement institutions regulated in the European Union are the object of the agreement. This is,
however, an inference that has not been made, and these treaties have not been included if nothing more
speciﬁc is found therein. If the opposite had been the criteria, there would have been no justiﬁcation to not
include as well treaties that contain the requirement to respect the “highest international standards” of
protection, or the subject matter of treaties included by reference in PTAs.

The case of customs organizations and regional integration areas deserves particular attention.28
Some customs unions have given place to powerful intellectual protection systems regardless of the fact
that the original treaty only alluded to intellectual property in general terms. Both the European Union and
the Andean Community29 are relevant examples, since complete regimes for the protection of intellectual
property have been developed years after the creation of the customs union.30 Other customs unions also
address some aspects of intellectual property law, although the level of detail does not reach that of the
European Union or the Andean Community.31 A third group of customs organization includes those with
no intellectual property regulation at all.32

In order to illustrate more accurately the present situation, our research reﬂects whether the criteria are
currently fulﬁlled. Hence, while for the purposes of chronological description the date taken as reference is
the date when the customs union was created, the analysis did not stop in the original treaty but extended to
the regime adopted afterwards. The same has been done with respect PTAs since, in a number of cases
intellectual property has been regulated through bilateral decisions adopted after the original PTA was
concluded. This is the case of some agreements promoted by China,33 as well as the case of the agreement
between the European Union and Mexico.34

The analysis has been conﬁned to the sample of PTAs obtained from the identiﬁcation of intellectual
property provisions in the strictest sense. This includes explicit references to intellectual property,
intellectual property categories and intellectual property enforcement. Consequently, the analysis does not
consider regulatory measures impacting on products that may also be protected by intellectual property

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

243

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

rights. Although it is indeed true that in areas such as public health the inclusion of compromises
regarding price control of pharmaceutical products,35 or
the creation of bilateral committees
empowered to supervise pharmaceutical policy and legislation,36 has been considered a new source of
pressure that may impact access to health in a manner akin to intellectual property (Seuba, 2013b, pp. 38,
41), the examination of these compromises is better addressed in the context of technical barriers to
trade.

Criteria for Searching the Selected Treaties

The criteria searched reﬂect three major topics. A ﬁrst set of criteria intends to ascertain the relevance that
intellectual property has in the overall treaty and the internal architecture adopted for the regulation of
intellectual property. A second set of criteria reﬂects whether speciﬁc categories of intellectual assets are
regulated. A third group goes into the analysis of secondary norms of adjudication such as those related to
enforcement institutions.

First, the structure of the treaties has been analyzed to ascertain the number and organization of the
provisions on intellectual property. Treaties including one speciﬁc chapter or annex on intellectual
property have been differentiated from those including one or a reduced number of provisions. In terms of
structure and systemic effects, it has also been considered important to reﬂect which treaties legislate by
reference that is which treaties order to fulﬁl or ratify speciﬁc intellectual property conventions, either
adopted by the World Intellectual Property Organization or elsewhere.

The second group of criteria subject of our search concerns intellectual property categories covered in
PTAs. The selection includes copyright, patents, trademarks, industrial designs, geographical indications
and undisclosed information. With regard to the latter, a distinction is made between treaties that generally
regulate the protection of undisclosed information and treaties that speciﬁcally establish the obligation to
protect regulatory test data for a speciﬁc number of years.

The third group of criteria concerns intellectual property enforcement. In this regard, treaties
regulating intellectual property but not mentioning enforcement, treaties making a general reference to
enforcement, and treaties with detailed regulation on enforcement have been distinguished. Distinct areas
of enforcement have also been identiﬁed in each treaty: civil, criminal, digital and border enforcement.
Another aspect identiﬁed concerns cooperation on enforcement which, as it will explained, has been
treated separately.

Classification of Countries

The UNDP Human Development Index as Criterion to Classify Countries and Treaties
The asymmetry between PTAs members is a frequent area of debate and attention. This is the reason why
it has been deemed useful to classify countries according to their level of development, and to group PTAs
in accordance with the level of development of treaty members. In order to do this, the United Nations
Development Program (UNDP) 2013 Human Development Index (HDI) (UNDP, 2013, pp. 143–7) has
been selected as the relevant standard.

Three groups of treaties have been identiﬁed: treaties between countries pertaining to the group of
“very high human development” states; treaties between countries pertaining the group of “very high
human development” and the other three groups (high, medium and low human development) and treaties
between countries pertaining to the last three mentioned groups. The goal is to reﬂect whether treaties have
been concluded between countries that, following the more colloquial terminology, are generally
considered to be developed or developing countries, the latter encompassing high, medium and low
human development countries in the HDI.

244

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

Several options had been considered to illustrate the level of development of the parties to PTAs. One
option was to differentiate states according to their membership to regional or interest groups, which tend
to reﬂect either the level of development or the development concerns of their members. In the same line, it
was considered to identify countries as belonging to one the four lists of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development (UNCTAD),37 or distinguish them depending on whether they pertain to the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OCDE). It was also considered to merely
take into account World Bank stats on the selected criteria, such as the gross domestic product or the per
capita income.

The mentioned criteria have been considered unsatisfactory either because the diversity existing
within the groups is still too signiﬁcant (this is the case of regional and interest groupings) or they do not
reﬂex anymore the economic and social international reality (this is arguably the case of UNCTAD lists,
OCDE membership and individual criteria such as the per capita income). At the end, the UNDP HDI has
been regarded as the adequate criterion. Its combination of indicators on life expectancy, education and
income into a composite index offers a comprehensive approach to development. Each of the four groups
into which the HDI is split comprises more than forty countries. Although sometimes the grouping of one
speciﬁc country may seem surprising when other questions are considered (particularly the relevance of
the country in international trade debates38 and the global subjective perception on their level of
development39), the HDI is still an excellent and objective indicator.

PTAs and Developing Countries
The majority of intellectual property provisions in PTAs are included out of the demands of developed
countries, particularly when the provisions are detailed and highly demanding. Although this is commonly
acknowledged, it is still worth mentioning. On the one hand because the present research gives
quantitative evidence that the most detailed and demanding treaties are always participated by a developed
country and hardly ever by two developing countries alone.40 It also shows that treaties including
provisions related to highly sensitive topics such digital enforcement or pharmaceutical test data
protection are never concluded by developing countries between themselves.41

The same stats showing that in the majority of cases the inclusion of intellectual property is a demand
from developed countries, demonstrate that developing countries do conclude between them PTAs
regulating intellectual property, sometimes in a fairly detailed way.42 This phenomenon, which seems to
contradict the general perception of developing countries as net importers of intellectual property
standards, has several explanations.

In some cases, developing countries adopt said provisions because they have negotiated earlier on a
PTA with a developed country. The previous treaty might have been already implemented in the national
law, and the developing country acts as intellectual property “pollinator” of another developing country.43
This phenomenon, however, does not explain why developing countries would transfer previous
commitments to other international treaties if they were not satisﬁed with them. In fact, the position of
states such as Mexico and Chile, with very open trade policies, would seem to obey to the conformity with
their current level of intellectual property protection, either because they have found the way to implement
PTAs in a competitive fashion or just because they overall agree with the standards negotiated.

Reality is, however, richer and it is also possible that some developing countries use PTAs to expand
and internationalize their views. That is, developing countries can ﬁnd in PTAs a tool to foster their
position on subjects such as traditional knowledge, disclosure of origin of genetic resources (Valde´s and
Tavengwa, 2012) to promote international cooperation between themselves,44 or to deal with cross-
cutting issues of their concern, such as dispute settlement. In this last regard, it is noticeable for instance
that some of the treaties concluded between developing countries expressly exclude the intellectual
property chapter from the dispute settlement mechanism.45 This is probably only incipient, but some of the

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

245

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

reasons offered to justify the adoption of intellectual property in PTAs could work both for developing and
developed countries. This is for instance the case of the argument holding that the inclusion of intellectual
property in PTAs permits to export national views and create momentum for their multilateralization: if
this was already the case of NAFTA in relation to TRIPS (Stewart, 1995, p. 560), it could also work for
agreements reached between emerging economies and later on exported to developing countries.

Structure of the Treaties

The study of the structure of the PTAs may give valuable clues about its substantive content. Whether
there is one speciﬁc chapter devoted to intellectual property, or whether the treaty follows the technique of
legislation by reference, among other relevant criteria, may offer information to anticipate the overall
relevance of the treaty.

Treaties With One Provision
Some treaties include only one article speciﬁcally devoted to intellectual property. When this is the case,46
there are two possibilities: either the relevant provision regulates one particular institution (usually border
measures47 or geographical indications48) and remains silent on other issues, or the reference to
intellectual property is drafted in general terms and mixes principles, objectives and commitments of
broad nature, with references to issues such as dispute settlement and cooperation.

In the latter case, the provision on intellectual property frequently alludes to questions such as the
commitment to respect intellectual property obligations in line with TRIPS or the “highest international
standards,”49 the recognition of the importance of intellectual property as a factor of economic
competitiveness50 or the willingness of the parties to collaborate in the area of intellectual property.51
These references are accompanied by the mention of dispute settlement or cooperation in the context of
intellectual property.52

In other occasions, treaties that include only one provision on intellectual property enshrine ambitious
commitments. In this case, if interpreted pursuant the conventional rules on treaty interpretation, drastic
changes may be necessary to fulﬁl obligations as broad and ambitious as to “improve the intellectual
property system” or “become member to international agreements to which it is not party.”53

Extensive Regulation
Numerous PTAs incorporate detailed regulation on a variable set of intellectual property institutions.
Some trends with regard to the number, content and organization of the articles in the context of the treaty
can be found.

Among the treaties that include more than one article speciﬁcally devoted to intellectual property, the
majority of them contain one speciﬁc section or chapter on the matter (Figure 2). In the rest of the cases,
only two, three or four articles regulating substantive issues are found scattered in the text.54

PTAs that include one speciﬁc section devoted to intellectual property have become common.
Intellectual property regulation therein is usually organized in two different ways. Some covenants
incorporate a single article in the main body of the text, which refers the reader to an annex speciﬁcally
devoted to intellectual property.55 In this case, the article in the text of the treaty announces the intentions
of the parties and recognizes fundamental principles, while detailed regulation is found in the annex.56 A
different case is that of treaties that devote one speciﬁc chapter within the treaty to regulate intellectual
property, having the number of the treaties that follow this model radically augmented in the last years.
When a treaty includes either a chapter or an annex on intellectual property, its organization can
follow different patterns of complexity and detail. In the bottom end, there are treaties with speciﬁc
intellectual property chapters or annexes that do not make further internal delimitation. No sections and

246

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

Figure 2. Structure of the treaties, and distribution between developing and developed countries: number of treaties regulating
intellectual property; with one provision; between two and four provisions; with an annex or speciﬁc chapter

subsections are found therein, and topics with no further connection among themselves follow
consecutively. In fact, some treaties with a speciﬁc chapter on intellectual property only touch upon a
single substantive area.57 In the bottom up, other treaties are structured in a highly detailed fashion, with
numerous sections and sub-sections. In some cases, intellectual property chapters even include a preface,
or more commonly a section on general provisions, which are policy oriented and can fulﬁl a valuable
function when interpreting the treaty.58 The introductory provisions are usually followed by sections
regulating intellectual property categories, intellectual property enforcement,
intellectual property
acquisition and some ﬁnal provisions on a diverse range of topics: dispute settlement, cooperation and
institutional provisions.

Legislation by Reference
In addition to the internal organization, also the connections made with external sources may be relevant in
terms substantive content and interaction with the rest of public international law. One common technique
in international law making is legislation by reference (Michajlovicˇ, 1992). Fundamentally, it implies that
one state undertakes the compromise to respect or access to a treaty. This was already the case of the
TRIPS, which incorporated some of the main international intellectual property agreements that existed
before the WTO was created (Cottier and Veron, 2008). PTAs also follow this technique and refer to
conventions not mentioned in TRIPS.

In the research conducted 61 treaties have been identiﬁed as having recourse to legislation by
reference as a technique to broaden the scope of the PTA.59 Thirty-three out of those 61 treaties correspond
to covenants subscribed between developed and developing countries, 22 to treaties adopted between
developed countries and 6 to treaties adopted between developing countries (Figure 3).

The terminology used when legislating by reference is varied and sometimes confusing. Some
expressions are clear enough, being for instance the case of the obligations undertaken to “accede to,”
“give effect to” or “give effect to and make effort to accede to.” Frequently, though, the link made to other
international treaties is ambiguous or does not seem logical from the strictly legal point of view. For
instance, which are the speciﬁc obligations arising from expressions such as “make best efforts to accede
to,” “make all reasonable efforts to accede to” or “afﬁrm accession to” is dubious.

Legislation by reference has been used to integrate a large number of treaties. However, four treaties
are the most commonly referred to. These are the Patent Cooperation Treaty, the International Convention

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

247

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Figure 3. Legislation by reference. Treaties that order to ratify, fulﬁl, implement or respect other international treaties on intellectual
property, disaggregated in accordance to the HDI of the parties

for the Protection of New Plant Varieties of 1991, WIPO Copyright Treaty, WIPO Performances and
Phonograms and the Convention relating to the distribution of program-carrying signals transmitted by
satellite.

Intellectual Property Categories Covered

A signiﬁcant number of PTAs regulate speciﬁc intellectual property categories and have been concluded
between countries pertaining to very different levels of development. Our research has been focused on
which treaties include speciﬁc regulation on patents, trademarks, geographical indications, copyright,
undisclosed information, regulatory test data and/or designs.

In the case of patents, 58 treaties have been identiﬁed as regulating some aspects of patent law.60 Of
these treaties, 6 have been concluded between developing countries, 32 between developed and
developing countries and 20 between developed countries.

As far as trademarks are concerned, 60 treaties have been identiﬁed as regulating trademark law.61 Of
these, 9 have been concluded between developing countries, between 32 developed and developing
countries and between 19 developed countries.

With regard to copyright, 50 treaties have been identiﬁed as regulating copyright law.62 Of these, 8
have been concluded between developing countries, between 27 developed and developing countries and
between 15 developed countries.

The protection of undisclosed information is mandated in 51 PTAs63: 7 out of 51 have been concluded
between developing countries, 27 between developed and developing countries and 17 between developed
countries. As a subset of this type of protection, a more limited number of treaties—21—oblige to
protected pharmaceutical and agrochemical test data by granting a number of years of exclusivity. Only 1
treaty out of 21 covenants has been concluded between developing countries, while 13 were
concluded between developed and developing countries and 7 adopted between developed countries
(Figure 4).

This chart shows two different and important aspects. On the one hand, it reﬂects the number of
treaties among the selected group of 141 PTAs that include speciﬁc regulation of selected intellectual

248

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

Figure 4. Number of PTA that regulate distinct intellectual property categories and whether they have been adopted between
developing, developed or developing and developed countries

property categories. On the other hand, it also shows whether the treaties have been adopted between
developed countries, developed and developing countries or between developing countries.

Following with the remaining intellectual property categories, 77 PTAs regulate the protection of
geographical indications.64 In this case, 11 treaties have been concluded between developing countries, 24
between developed countries and the rest, 42, between developing and developed countries.

Designs have been also object of

regulation in 40 PTA65: 5 were concluded between
developing countries, 12 between developed countries and 23 between developing and developed
countries.

The fact that several treaties regulate one speciﬁc intellectual property category does not say much
about the substantive content of these treaties. The differences from treaty to treaty can be very relevant. In
some instances, the level of generality may be notable and the impact of the concerned provisions
correspondingly limited.66 Frequently, however, the references to an intellectual property category target
very speciﬁc questions, sometimes related with an ongoing debate in the international arena,67 a disputed
issue between the parties,68 or just one speciﬁc claim of rightholders.69 Hence, regardless of the fact that
two treaties are considered to fulﬁl the same criteria, its speciﬁc impact will vary signiﬁcantly and has to be
studied individually.70

Stats showing the treaties that regulate particular intellectual property categories are, however, useful
to arrive to some preliminary conclusions. They show that countries pertaining to all levels of
development adopt treaties regulating the most important intellectual property categories in a meaningful
way. Nevertheless, the stats also reﬂect that the promoters of the incorporation of speciﬁc regulation on
intellectual property categories in PTAs are countries pertaining to the group of “very high human
development countries.” This statement can be conﬁrmed through several ways, for instance examining
the two categories of intellectual property having, respectively, the lowest and the highest number of
developing countries as the sole members. The protection of undisclosed information for pharmaceutical
and agrochemical test data has only been an option for the 0.21% of the treaties concluded by developing
countries alone, while geographical indications was only an option for the 7% of treaties concluded
between developing countries alone. The rest of categories fall within these extremes, which seem fairly
low to argue that intellectual property is a meaningful target for developing countries if no other incentives
are provided. As a proof of this, at least the 93% of PTAs that regulate one or several intellectual property
categories involve a “very high human development” country.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

249

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Figure 5. Number of treaties per year that regulate intellectual property, that allude to intellectual property enforcement in general or
that contain speciﬁc regulation of enforcement

Enforcement Provisions

PTAs have been one of the leading sources of new normative compromises in the area of intellectual
property enforcement. Beginning with the United States but soon after the European Union, the main
trading powers have made intellectual property enforcement a prominent component of the PTAs
negotiated in the last 10 years (Figure 5).

The two basic sources of new enforcement compromises in PTAs were adopted within a short period
of time. In 2002, the United States adopted its Trade Promotion Act,71 which stated the objective to export
United States intellectual property standards through PTAs72 and that the purpose of the United States in
this area is that of “providing strong enforcement of intellectual property rights, including through
accessible, expeditious, and effective civil, administrative, and criminal enforcement mechanisms.”73 The
other text of relevance is the 2004 European Union’s Strategy for the Enforcement of Intellectual Property
Rights in Third Countries (Strategy for the Enforcement) (European Commission, 2004) which mapped
the future actions of the European Union as far as international enforcement is concerned. Among other
activities, it announced the promotion of the adoption of new legal undertakings on enforcement. In
congruence with that goal, the EU has inserted powerful intellectual property enforcement provisions in
ambitious economic treaties.74

Not all the PTAs that regulate intellectual property address enforcement.75 The present research has
distinguished between treaties that make a general reference to intellectual property enforcement76 and
treaties that introduce detailed regulation in this area.77 Although our attention has been focused on the
latter, some differentiation among those treaties making a general reference to intellectual property
enforcement can be made.

First, not all levels of generality are equal. While some treaties just mention enforcement in a general
fashion, being difﬁcult to extract concrete consequences,78 other treaties containing general references are
of more practical implications. This is the case of treaties where parties compromise to fulﬁl enforcement
obligations as foreseen in TRIPS.79 In the majority of cases, this adds nothing to the already existing
compromises of the parties,80 since all of them are Members of the WTO. However, it may have relevance
if dispute settlement mechanisms set forth if the respective treaties are triggered.

Treaties have also been identiﬁed depending on whether or not they regulate several areas of

intellectual property enforcement: civil,81 criminal,82 border83 and digital84 enforcement (Figure 6).

250

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

Figure 6. Number of treaties addressing different areas of intellectual property enforcement

When compared with the structure of TRIPS Part III, the areas of enforcement identiﬁed in this
research present two important differences. The ﬁrst concerns the inclusion of precautionary measures
within the area of civil enforcement, while the second relates to the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc provisions on
digital enforcement.

The regulation of intellectual property enforcement in the digital domain is one of the major post-
TRIPS changes. Since the adoption of the WIPO Internet treaties in 1996, PTAs started to order its
ratiﬁcation. Treaties effectively counted in this research are not those having recourse to that technique,
but those other that directly regulate digital enforcement. In this context, it has been considered that an
agreement contains measures in the digital enforcement area when it alludes to anti-circumvention of
effective technological measures, electronic rights management information or the possibility to order an
on-line service provider to disclose information to a right holder.85

With regard to border enforcement, the number of treaties selected could have been higher if all
treaties potentially affecting goods protected by intellectual property rights had been counted. In PTAs, it
is very common to ﬁnd provisions on customs, which regulate questions such as inspection and transit. In
fact, this is one of the central aspects of all PTAs. However, in line with what has been previously held,
only treaties directly regulating intellectual property—in this case, at the border—are included. This
means that treaties that regulate border measures but do not foresee anything in particular with regard
intellectual property are not reﬂected in this research.

Another aspect identiﬁed has been whether or not treaties include provisions related to cooperation on
enforcement.86 It was deemed interesting to reﬂect this provision for a double reason. First, it is the basis of
an important number of activities currently taking place worldwide. International cooperation to improve
enforcement has increased dramatically, and PTAs have a very clear role in that regard. Second,
cooperation on enforcement pertains to a set of obligations of distinct nature when compared to civil,
administrative or criminal enforcement. While the main addressee of the former is the State, in the latter
the private relations between rightholders, competitors and users take center-stage.

Conclusions

The number of PTAs regulating intellectual property is impressive. The analysis of the treaties notiﬁed to
the WTO permits to conclude that 141 out of 256 PTAs regulate intellectual property in a meaningful way.
To this number must be added those other treaties that mention intellectual property in a general,
tangential or indirect manner, which have not been considered relevant for the purposes of this research.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

251

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

The diversity within the 141 PTAs is very important. Some treaties regulate very speciﬁc aspects
while others set forth complete chapters with detailed provisions. For the purpose of this research, both
cases may fulﬁll the same criterion. For instance, both may be found to regulate patents, or civil
enforcement. However, its speciﬁc impact can vary signiﬁcantly and has to be studied individually.
Additional sub-criteria need to be added in further research.

The WTO RTA-IS is not totally accurate when offering the list of PTAs that have been notiﬁed to the
Organization and regulate intellectual property. Some treaties are missing while others which have been
included do not seem to regulate intellectual property. In fact, the complex and diverse reality of PTAs
gives place to different accounts with regard to their number, scope and content.

There are several templates for the organization of intellectual property norms in PTAs. In addition to
norms that put into relation intellectual property with free trade, investment and competition, treaties
follow three different ways of organizing the intellectual property content. In some cases, one general
provision in the main text of the treaty remits the speciﬁc regulation to an annex. In other occasions, more
and more frequent, PTAs include one speciﬁc chapter on intellectual property. Finally, there are also
treaties that contain one or a reduced number of provisions speciﬁcally related to intellectual property.
The ﬁndings show that intellectual property regulation is dynamic. Intellectual property obligations
are not only adopted in the text of the original PTA, but are also fruit of the normative action undertaken in
the context of the regime created therein. Although in the majority of cases the original PTA has been the
source to determine the fulﬁllment of the selected criteria, custom unions show that intellectual property
norms are also adopted years after the conclusion of the original agreement. In fact, the creation of regimes
where intellectual property evolves in a closed context is not unfamiliar to bilateral PTAs. Moreover,
considering that more and more treaties create organs such as intellectual property committees, this will
probably become more and more frequent.

Deciding on whether a treaty fulﬁlls the criteria of the research is not always conclusive. Given that
the criteria selected are wide-encompassing and intend to embrace very different situations, the difﬁculties
to classify treaties are frequently related with two characteristics of a relevant number of PTAs: the
ambiguity and level of generality of the obligations undertaken. Obligations of unclear meaning or drafted
in merely aspirational terms abound in PTAs. Moreover, the technique of legislation by reference
frequently introduces vague commitments, while the obligation to fulﬁll the “highest international
standards” or to “improve the intellectual property system” is a source of uncertainty.

This article offers a tool to deepen the research as well as an instrument to reach some substantive
insights around PTAs. Some of the observations are well acknowledged, such as the fact that the majority
of intellectual property provisions in PTAs are included out of the demands of developed countries,
particularly when the provisions are detailed and highly demanding. But other observations, particularly
with regard the content of treaties concluded between developing countries, call for further reﬂection and
monitoring.

About the Author

Xavier Seuba, PhD, Centre d’Etudes Interntionales de la Proprie´te´ Intellectuelle, University of
Strasbourg, 5, Schiller, Strasbourg, 67000, France; e-mail: xavier.seuba@ceipi.edu

Acknowledgements

This research has been funded by the Knowledge and Economy Department of the Catalan Government in
the context of the COFUND Program of the EU Marie Curie Actions of the Seventh Framework Program.

252

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

Notes

1. Under this term, are grouped trade agreements notiﬁed to the World Trade Organization under paragraph 8(a) and
8(b) of article XXIV of GATT 1994 (customs union and free trade agreements); article V of GATS (economic
integration agreements); and under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause (partial scope agreements).

2. The treaties quoted in this text can be found in http://rtais.wto.org.
3. One of the ﬁrst PTAs that changed that pattern was the US-Israel FTA of 1986, which stated in article 14 that “The
Parties reafﬁrm their obligations under bilateral and multilateral agreements relating to intellectual property
rights, including industrial property rights, in effect between the Parties. Accordingly, nationals and companies of
each Party shall continue to be accorded national and most favored nation treatment with respect to obtaining,
maintaining and enforcing patents of invention, with respect to obtaining and enforcing copyrights, and with
respect to rights in trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade labels, and industrial property of all kinds.”

4. General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 30 October 1947, 61 Stat. A-11, 55 U.N.T.S. 194.
5. This is also an exception found in almost all, if not all, the PTAs later on notiﬁed to the WTO. See for instance,
among more than 200 similarly drafted articles, article 11 of the Free Trade Agreement between Armenia and
Kazakhstan, WT/REG123/1, 8 March 2001.

6. Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, 15 April 1994, Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization, Annex 1C, Legal Instruments Results of the Uruguay Round,
1869 U.N.T.S. 299, 33 I.L.M. 1197 (1994).

7. Without being exhaustive, the following works can be quoted Abbott (2004, 2005, 2006), Correa (2004a), Drahos
(2005), Fink (2011), Heath and Kamperman (2007), Matthews and Mu~noz-Tellez (2006), Roffe (2004), Roffe
et al. (2007), Roffe and Santa Cruz (2006), Seuba (2009, 2013a).

8. In fact, the only work covering all the content of TRIPS as re-drafted or endorsed in PTAs was published already
9 years ago and used a limited number of treaties to exemplify how intellectual property legislation had evolved
after TRIPS, mainly through the adoption of PTAs (UNCTAD-ICTSD, 2005).

9. World Trade Organization Regional Trade Agreements Information-System (RTA_IS), http://rtais.wto.org/UI/

PublicMaintainRTAHome.aspx (accessed March 2013).

10. http://rtais.wto.org/UI/PublicSearchByCrResult.aspx (accessed March 2013).
11. http://rtais.wto.org/ui/PublicAllRTAList.aspx (accessed March 2013).
12. ASEAN–New Zealand–Australia; ASEAN–India; Japan–ASEAN; Korea–ASEAN; CARICOM; Dominican
Republic–Central America–United States; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–
Republic of Lebanon; EFTA–Palestinian Authority; EFTA–Peru; EFTA–Turkey; EFTA–Ukrania; EU–Algeria;
EU–Bosnia; EU–Cameroon; EU–Cariforum; EU–Colombia; EU–Peru; Gulf Cooperation Council; Japan–India;
Japan–Peru; Korea–India; Korea–United States; Panama–Honduras; Panama–Peru; Turkey–Palestinian
Authority; Turkey–Syria; Turkey–Bosnia; United States–Bahrein; United States–Oman; United States–
Colombia; United States–Panama; United States–Israel.

13. Agreements between Armenia and Ukraine, CEMAC, Georgia and Ukraine, Kyrgyz Republic and Ukraine,
Kyrgyz Republic and Moldova, Peru and Singapore, Jordan and Singapore, China and Macao, Australia and
Singapore.

14. In the case of the agreements between Peru and Singapore, and Jordan and Singapore, ofﬁcial web pages of the

mentioned agreements expressly exclude intellectual property.

15. These are the cases of treaties between Costa Rica–China; EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–Hong
Kong; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–Peru; EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Ukraine; EU–Colombia; EU–Korea; EU–Peru;
Gulf Cooperation Council; Hong Kong China–New Zealand; Japan–India; Japan–Peru; Korea–United States;
New Zealand–Malaysia; Panama–Peru; Peru–Chile; Peru–Republic of Korea; MERCOSUR; Turkey–Chile;
Turkey–Jordan; United States–Colombia; United States–Panama.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

253

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

16. While we identiﬁed six categories of intellectual property rights, Valde´s and Tavengwa identiﬁed not only

intellectual property categories but also areas of concern, to search 11 distinct topics.

17. Reference to the most favored nation treatment and the national treatment.
18. “Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of
arbitrary or unjustiﬁable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised
restriction on international trade, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or
enforcement by any contracting party of measures: (…)(d) necessary to secure compliance with laws or
regulations which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those relating to customs
enforcement, the enforcement of monopolies operated under paragraph 4 of article II and article XVII, the
protection of patents, trade marks and copyrights, and the prevention of deceptive practices.”

19. For instance, this reference is found in article 68 of the EU-Cote d’Ivoire. In the treaties effectively selected in this
research, the same reference can be found for instance in article 23 of the EU–Lebanon; article 13 of the Turkey-
Bosnia Herzegovina; and article 8 of the EFTA–Palestinian Authority.

20. In fact, it does not say much about the substantive protection of intellectual assets, as happens as well with other
norms in PTAs indirectly affecting intellectual property. Although it has effects on the implementation of
intellectual property norms, the same could be said with regard other articles commonly found in PTAs, for
instance those on goods in transit or those other ordering the communication of laws.

21. This is for instance the case of the article 56 of the free trade agreement between Brunei–Japan or, in the case of

customs unions, the COMESA agreement article 159.2(e).

22. Hence, free trade agreements such as that between Canada and Israel have not been included. In the treaties,
effectively selected this reference is almost always found. See for instance article 15.02 of the Chile–Central
America agreement.

23. Request for Arbitration, FTR Holdings S.A. (Switzerland) v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay, ICSID case no. ARB/

10/7 (19 February 2010).

24. This is the case of treaties including only afﬁrmations such as article 57 of the Singapore–New Zealand FTA “The
Parties agree that the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights shall govern and
apply to all intellectual property issues arising from this Agreement.” In the regional context, the case of article 24
of the 1996 SADC Protocol on Trade can be mentioned.

25. This is the case of the Agreement between Chile and Mexico, concluded in 1998 and entered into force in 1999,
thus anticipating the implementation of TRIPS, as well as going beyond in some aspects. See Roffe (2004). In
http://www.quno.org/geneva/pdf/economic/Issues/Bilateral-Agreements-and-TRIPS-plus-English.pdf
(ac-
cessed April 2013).

26. This is for instance the case of the treaty between Japan and ASEAN, or the COMESA treaty, which speciﬁcally

mention cooperation in the area of patent regulation article 128(e).

27. A provision of this type is found in agreements with Albania, Macedonia, Croatia, Bosnia, Montenegro, Serbia

and Turkey.

28. These are also considered PTAs, in the terms described above in fn. 1.
29. Although the WTO does not count it among those that have regulated IP.
30. Article 36 of the 1957 Treaty Establishing the European community stated that “The provisions of Articles 30 to
34 inclusive shall not be an obstacle to prohibitions or restrictions in respect of importation, exportation or transit
which are justiﬁed on grounds of public morality, public order, public safety, the protection of human or animal
life or health, the preservation of plant life, the protection of national treasures of artistic, historical or
archaeological value or the protection of industrial and commercial property. Such prohibitions or restrictions
shall not, however, constitute either a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between
Member States.”

254

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

31. The East African Community (EAC), the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), CARICOM, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and Mercosur. The particularities of EFTA deserve some speciﬁc mention, since it has
endorsed EU legislation in the area of intellectual property.

32. SADC, ECOWAS and other African regional organizations have rarely mentioned intellectual property in their

constitutive texts.

33. There are two cases: the Mainland and Hong Kong closer Economic Partnership Agreement, and the ASEAN and
China Agreement on Trade in Goods. In the case of the Mainland and Hong Kong closer Economic Partnership
Agreement, the subsequent Supplement V to the Agreement makes a very general reference to IP. In the case of
the ASEAN and China Agreement on Trade in Goods, it was only in the 2004 when the Memorandum of
Understanding between ASEAN and China on Cooperation in the Field of Intellectual Property addressed
intellectual property. In fact, in this case the WTO was not notiﬁed the original Framework Agreement on
Comprehensive Economic Co-Operation Between ASEAN and the People’s Republic of China of 2002, but an
agreement concluded 2 years later on trade in goods. A number of agreements followed the adoption of the
Framework Agreement. The Agreement on Trade in Goods, of 29 November 2004, is the one containing the
Memorandum of Understanding between ASEAN and China on Cooperation in the Field of Intellectual Property.
Even in this memorandum, the protection of IP results very light, since its article 6 establishes that “This
Memorandum of Understanding is an expression of intent by All Participants to cooperate in their mutual
interests. The aim under Articles 2 and 3 therefore are not binding but rather All Participants are encouraged to use
their best endeavors to promote and achieve the objectives of this Memorandum of Understanding.”

34. It was after the conclusion of the PTA that the EU–Mexico Council adopted a decision to create an IP Committee.
35. See article 3.4.1, Annex 2-D, of the Association Agreement between the EU and Republic of Korea.
36. See article 15.3.1 of the Free Trade Agreement between the United States and the Republic of Korea as well as

article 5 of Annex 2-D of the Association Agreement between the EU and Republic of Korea.

37. Lists of States referred to in paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX).
38. This is very particularly the case of India and China, which are found in the third group, “medium human
development,” while their power is indeed more similar to several States found in the group of “very high human
development.”

39. This is the case of Chile and Argentina, which are commonly considered emerging economies or developing

countries, but that in the UNDP list pertain to the group of “very high human development.”

40. This observation results from combining the data that reﬂect what treaties include one speciﬁc chapter on

intellectual property, the categories covered and the areas of research regulated.

41. See below section on “Intellectual property categories covered.”
42. This is the case for instance of the agreement between Mexico and Costa Rica.
43. This seems to be the case of the treaties between Mexico and several Central American states, negotiated after the

conclusion of the NAFTA.

44. Interestingly, agreements between developing countries sometimes contain provisions where parties to the
agreement engage in consulting each other in the context of multilateral negotiations (see for instance the MOU
between ASEAN–China, and the agreements between Ukraine–Moldavia; Ukraine–Macedonia).

45. See for instance the agreement between Korea and India, article 12.6, on “NON-APPLICATION OF DISPUTE
SETTLEMENT PROVISIONS: Chapter Fourteen (Dispute Settlement) shall not apply to any matter or dispute
arising under this Chapter” (intellectual property). The agreement between Brunei Darussalam–Japan, article
100, states that “The dispute settlement procedures provided for in Chapter 10 shall not apply to this Chapter.”
Chapter 10 includes IP. In the case of the agreement between Chile and China, its intellectual property chapter
states that “No Party shall have recourse to Chapter X for any issue arising from or relating to this Chapter.”
46. ASEAN–Republic of Korea; Brunei Darussalam–Japan; Canada–Chile; Canada–Costa Rica; Caribbean
Community and Common Market (CARICOM); Chile–Central America; Chile–Panama; China–Hong Kong,
China; East African Community (EAC); EFTA–Palestinian Authority; EFTA–SACU; Egypt–Turkey; EU–

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

255

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Cameroon; EU–Mexico; EU–Palestinian Authority; EU–South Africa; Faroe Islands–Norway; Gulf Cooperation
Council; India–ASEAN; Pakistan–China; Peru–Chile; Southern African Development Community (SADC);
Turkey–Albania; Turkey–Bosnia and Herzegovina; Turkey–Croatia; Turkey–Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; Turkey–Georgia; Turkey–Jordan; Turkey–Montenegro; Turkey–Morocco; Turkey–Palestinian
Authority; Turkey–Serbia; Turkey–Syria; Turkey–Tunisia; Ukraine–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia;
Ukraine–Moldova; United States–Israel.

47. See for instance, article 10 of the Agreement between Pakistan and China.
48. Case of the treaties between Chile and Canada; Canada–Costa Rica; Chile–Central America; Chile–Panama.
49. EFTA–Palestinian Authority article 15.1.
50. ASEAN–Republic of Korea, article 10.1.
51. EFTA–Palestinian Authority article 15.2; ASEAN–Republic of Korea, article 10.1 and 10.2.
52. EFTA–Palestinian Authority articles 15.2 and 15.3.
53. See article 97 of the Brunei and Japan agreement, which also engages parties to “respect international
obligations,” “ensure transparent and streamlined administrative procedures,” “ensure adequate and effective
enforcement” and “endeavor to promote further awareness of intellectual property.”

54. Chile–China, article 10 on geographical indications, article 11 on border measures, article 111 on cooperation on
intellectual property; the same for the case of Japan and Mexico: geographical indications in article 8; intellectual
property in article 73; and cooperation in intellectual property in 144; in the case of Mexico and Israel, the relevant
article regulate geographical indications in annex 2-05 and reafﬁrmation of TRIPS in article 7.

55. EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Chile; EFTA–Croatia; EFTA–Egypt; EFTA–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia;
EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–Israel; EFTA–Jordan; EFTA–Republic of Korea; EFTA–Lebanon; EFTA–Mexico;
EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–Morocco; EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Singapore; EFTA–Tunisia; EFTA–Turkey;
EFTA–Ukraine; EU–Albania; EU–Algeria; EU–Bosnia and Herzegovina; EU–Chile; EU–Croatia; EU–Egypt;
EU–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; EU–Israel; EU–Jordan; EU–Lebanon; EU–Montenegro; EU–
Morocco; EU–Serbia; EU–Tunisia; EU–Turkey; Japan–India; Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Singapore; Turkey–
Israel.

56. Annexes, however, do differ: while the annexes of EFTA PTAs tend to be detailed, when the EU regulates
intellectual property in an annex and not in a chapter, the annex frequently only contains a list of treaties to ratify.
57. Case of the chapter 11 of the Agreement between Singapore and India, dealing with cooperation in the area of

intellectual property.

58. In this section, the objectives and principles of the IP section are spelled out, as it is was an entirely new
agreement. In fact, in some cases, this has been stressed by the addition of a preface, which has led commentators
to underline that IP appears to be an agreement within another (Roffe, 2004).

59. Australia–Chile; Colombia–Mexico; Costa Rica–Mexico; EC; EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Chile; EFTA–Colombia;
EFTA–Croatia; EFTA–Egypt; EFTA–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–
Israel; EFTA–Jordan; EFTA–Republic of Korea; EFTA–Lebanon; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–
Peru; EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Singapore; EFTA–Turkey; EFTA–Ukraine; EU–Albania; EU–Bosnia and
Herzegovina; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Chile; EU–Colombia; EU–Croatia; EU–Egypt; EU–Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; EU–Israel; EU–Jordan; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Lebanon; EU–Montenegro; EU–
Morocco; EU–Palestinian Authority; EU–Peru; EU–Serbia; EU–South Africa; EU–Tunisia; EU–Turkey;
European Economic Area (EEA); European Free Trade Association (EFTA); Japan–Switzerland; Republic of
Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Guatemala (Mexico–Northern
Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Panama—and the Separate Customs Territory of
Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; Singapore–Australia; United States–Australia; United States–Bahrain;
United States–Chile; United States–Colombia; United States–Jordan; United States–Morocco; United States–
Panama; United States–Oman; United States–Peru; United States–Singapore.

256

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

60. Andean Community of Nations; Australia–Chile; Dominican Republic–Central America–United States Free
Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR); EC; EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Chile; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–Croatia; EFTA–
Egypt; EFTA–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–Israel; EFTA–Jordan;
EFTA–Republic of Korea; EFTA–Lebanon; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–Moroco; EFTA–Peru;
EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Singapore; EFTA–Tunisia; EFTA–Turkey; EFTA–Ukraine; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–
Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; EU–Turkey; European Economic Area (EEA); European Free
Trade Association (EFTA); Japan–India; Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Malaysia; Japan–Peru; Japan–Philippines;
Japan–Singapore; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand; Japan–Viet Nam; Republic of Korea–Singapore;
Republic of Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Guatemala
(Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Nicaragua; Nicaragua
and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA); United States–Australia; United States–Bahrain; United States–Chile; United States–
Colombia; United States–Jordan; United States–Morocco; United States–Panama; United States–Oman; United
States–Peru; United States–Singapore.

61. Andean Community of Nations; ASEAN–Australia–New Zealand; Australia–Chile; Chile–Japan; Chile–
Mexico; China–Costa Rica; Colombia–Mexico; Costa Rica–Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central America–
United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR); EC; EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–Croatia;
EFTA–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–Israel; EFTA–Jordan; EFTA–
Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–Morocco; EFTA–Peru; EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Singapore; EFTA–Turkey;
EFTA–Ukraine; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Chile; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; EU–Turkey;
European Economic Area (EEA); European Free Trade Association (EFTA); Japan–India; Japan–Indonesia;
Japan–Malaysia; Japan–Mexico; Japan–Peru; Japan–Philippines; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand; Japan–
Viet Nam; Republic of Korea–Chile; Republic of Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern
Triangle); Mexico–Guatemala (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle);
Mexico–Nicaragua; Nicaragua and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu;
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR); United States–
Australia; United States–Bahrain; United States–Chile; United States–Colombia; United States–Morocco;
United States–Panama; United States–Oman; United States–Peru; United States–Singapore.

62. Andean Community of Nations; ASEAN–Australia–New Zealand; Australia–Chile; Chile–Mexico; Colombia–
Mexico; Costa Rica–Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central America–United States Free Trade Agreement
(CAFTA-DR); EC; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–Croatia; EFTA–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; EFTA–
Hong Kong; EFTA–Israel; EFTA–Jordan; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–Morocco; EFTA–Peru;
EFTA–Turkey; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; EU–Turkey; European
Economic Area (EEA); European Free Trade Association (EFTA); Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Peru; Japan–
Philippines; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand; Japan–Viet Nam; Republic of Korea–United States; Mexico–
El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Guatemala (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras
(Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Nicaragua; Nicaragua and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan,
Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); Peru–Republic of Korea; United
States–Australia; United States–Bahrain; United States–Chile; United States–Colombia; United States–Jordan;
United States–Morocco; United States–Panama; United States–Oman; United States–Peru; United States–
Singapore.

63. Andean Community of Nations; Colombia–Mexico; Costa Rica–Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central
America–United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR); EC; EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Chile; EFTA–
Colombia; EFTA–Croatia; EFTA–Egypt; EFTA–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; EFTA–Hong Kong;
EFTA–Israel; EFTA–Jordan; EFTA–Republic of Korea; EFTA–Lebanon; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro;
EFTA–Morocco; EFTA–Peru; EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Singapore; EFTA–Tunisia; EFTA–Turkey; EFTA–
Ukraine; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; EU–Turkey; European Economic Area (EEA);

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

257

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

European Free Trade Association (EFTA); Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Peru; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand;
Republic of Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Guatemala
(Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Nicaragua and the Separate
Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA);
United States–Australia; United States–Bahrain; United States–Chile; United States–Colombia; United States–
Jordan; United States–Morocco; United States–Panama; United States–Oman; United States–Peru; United
States–Singapore.

64. Andean Community of Nations; ASEAN–Australia–New Zealand; Australia–Chile; Canada–Chile; Canada–
Costa Rica; Canada–Peru; Chile–Central America; Chile–China; Chile–Japan; Chile–Mexico; Chile–Panama;
China–Costa Rica; Colombia–Mexico; Costa Rica–Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central America–United
States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR); EC; EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Chile; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–
Croatia; EFTA–Egypt; EFTA–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–Israel;
EFTA–Jordan; EFTA–Republic of Korea; EFTA–Lebanon; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–
Morocco; EFTA–Peru; EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Singapore; EFTA–Tunisia; EFTA–Turkey; EFTA–Ukraine; EU–
CARIFORUM; EU–Chile; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; EU–Turkey; European Economic
Area (EEA); European Free Trade Association (EFTA); Israel–Mexico; Japan–India; Japan–Malaysia; Japan–
Mexico; Japan–Peru; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand; Japan–Viet Nam; Republic of Korea–Chile; Republic
of Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Guatemala (Mexico–
Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Nicaragua; Nicaragua and the
Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA); Panama–and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; Peru–China;
Peru–Republic of Korea; Singapore–Australia; Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR); Trans-Paciﬁc
Strategic Economic Partnership; Turkey–Bosnia and Herzegovina; United States–Australia; United States–
Bahrain; United States–Chile; United States–Colombia; United States–Jordan; United States–Morocco; United
States–Panama; United States–Oman; United States–Peru; United States–Singapore.

65. Andean Community of Nations; EC; EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Chile; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–Croatia; EFTA–
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–Israel; EFTA–Jordan; EFTA–Republic of
Korea; EFTA–Lebanon; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–Morocco; EFTA–Peru; EFTA–Serbia;
EFTA–Singapore; EFTA–Tunisia; EFTA–Turkey; EFTA–Ukraine; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Colombia; EU–
Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; EU–Turkey; European Economic Area (EEA); European Free Trade Association
(EFTA); Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Mexico; Japan–Peru; Japan–Philippines; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand;
Japan–Viet Nam; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Guatemala (Mexico–Northern
Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle); North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA);
Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR).

66. See for instance article 4 of annex 8 of the EU and Turkey Agreement.
67. Se for instance article 86 of the Japan and Viet Nam agreements, on computer programs and patents.
68. For instance, the provision on patents contained in the agreement between Japan and Philippines, article 123,
states that “any applicant for a patent may ﬁle a request to the competent authority that his application be
examined promptly.”

69. Compensatory terms of protection for pharmaceuticals is for instance almost the sole real issue in article a of the

agreement between EFTA and Ukraine.

70. For instance, almost all the agreements concluded by EFTA include substantive regulation. However, not always
the substantive regulation is the same. While some treaties really enter into the regulation of substantive questions
such as patents, TM and copyright, others simply mention all these areas to include generic or ambiguous
obligations that point at the direction of enhanced protection. This is the case of the agreements between EFTA
and Croatia, Egypt, Macedonia, Israel, Jordan, Mexico, Morocco and Turkey.

258

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

71. Trade Act 1974, 19 U.S.C.A. § 2411 (2010).
72. Since it declares that among the principal negotiating objectives is “ensuring that the provisions of any
multilateral or bilateral trade agreement governing intellectual property rights that is entered into by the United
States reﬂect a standard of protection similar to that found in United States law.” Ibid., 4.A.(I)(ii).

73. Ibid., 4.A.(I) (v).
74. Report from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Application of the Directive 2004/48/EC of the European
Parliament and the Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property rights, Brussels, 22
December 2010, COM(2010)779 ﬁnal, p. 4.

75. This is the case of the agreements concluded between ASEAN–China; ASEAN–Australia–New Zealand;
ASEAN–Korea; Canada–Chile; Canada–Costa Rica; Canada–Peru; Caribbean Community and Common Market
(CARICOM); Chile–Central America; Chile–Panama; China–Hong Kong, China; Egypt–Turkey; EU–Egypt;
EU–Palestinian Authority; Faroe Islands–Norway; Gulf Cooperation Council; India–Singapore; Israel–Mexico;
Pakistan–Malaysia; Panama–Honduras (Panama–Central America); Peru–Chile; Southern African Development
Community (SADC); Southern Common Market
(MERCOSUR); Turkey–Jordan; Turkey–Palestinian
Authority; Turkey–Syria; Turkey–Tunisia; Ukraine–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; Ukraine–
Moldova; United States–Israel.

76. EU–Mexico; EU–Montenegro; EU–Morocco; EU–Serbia; EU–Tunisia; EU–Turkey; European Economic Area
(EEA); European Free Trade Association (EFTA); Hong Kong, China–New Zealand; Japan–India; Republic of
Korea–Chile; Republic of Korea–India; Korea–Singapore; Panama–Costa Rica (Panama–Central America);
Panama–El Salvador (Panama–Central America); Turkey–Albania; Turkey–Bosnia and Herzegovina; Turkey–
Croatia; Turkey–Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; Turkey–Georgia; Turkey–Israel; Turkey–
Montenegro; Turkey–Morocco; Turkey–Serbia.

77. Andean Community of Nations; Australia–Chile; Chile–China; Chile–Japan; Chile–Mexico; China–Costa Rica;
Colombia–Mexico; Costa Rica–Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central America–United States Free Trade
Agreement (CAFTA-DR); EC; EFTA–Albania; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–
Montenegro; EFTA–Peru; EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Ukraine; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of
Korea; EU–Peru; Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Malaysia; Japan–Peru; Japan–Philippines; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–
Thailand; Japan–Viet Nam; Republic of Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle);
Mexico–Guatemala (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–
Nicaragua; Nicaragua and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); Pakistan–China; Panama–Peru; Panama–and the Separate Customs
Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; Peru–China; Peru–Republic of Korea; Singapore–Australia;
Thailand–Australia; United States–Australia; United States–Bahrain; United States–Chile; United States–
Colombia; United States–Jordan; United States–Morocco; United States–Panama; United States–Oman; United
States–Peru; United States–Singapore.

78. Apart from those derived from declarations of good intentions.
79. This is frequently the case of agreements concluded by EFTA. See for instance article 5 of annex XII of the

agreement between EFTA and Turkey.

80. Exceptions would be the case of those treaties beneﬁting from periods of transition.
81. Andean Community of Nations; Australia–Chile; Chile–Japan; Chile–Mexico; Colombia–Mexico; Costa Rica–
Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central America–United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR); EC;
EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EFTA–Peru; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Colombia; EU–
Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Malaysia; Japan–Peru; Japan–Philippines; Japan–
Switzerland; Japan–Thailand; Japan–Viet Nam; Republic of Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador
(Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Guatemala (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–
Northern Triangle); Mexico–Nicaragua; North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); United States–

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

259

Xavier Seuba

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Australia; United States–Bahrain; United States–Chile; United States–Colombia; United States–Jordan; United
States–Morocco; United States–Panama; United States–Oman; United States–Peru; United States–Singapore.
82. Andean Community of Nations; Australia–Chile; Chile–Japan; Chile–Mexico; Colombia–Mexico; Costa Rica–
Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central America–United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR); EC;
EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Peru;
Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Malaysia; Japan–Peru; Japan–Philippines; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand; Japan–
Viet Nam; Republic of Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–
Guatemala (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Nicaragua;
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); United States–Australia; United States–Bahrain; United
States–Chile; United States–Colombia; United States–Jordan; United States–Morocco; United States–Panama;
United States–Oman; United States–Peru; United States–Singapore.

83. Albania–EFTA; Andean Community of Nations; Australia–Chile; Chile–Japan; Chile–Mexico; China–Costa
Rica; Colombia–Mexico; Costa Rica–Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central America–United States Free Trade
Agreement (CAFTA-DR); EC; EFTA–Colombia; EFTA–Hong Kong; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro;
EFTA–Peru; EFTA–Serbia; EFTA–Ukraine; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–
Peru; Japan–Indonesia; Japan–Malaysia; Japan–Peru; Japan–Philippines; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand;
Japan–Viet Nam; Republic of Korea–United States; Mexico–El Salvador (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–
Guatemala (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Honduras (Mexico–Northern Triangle); Mexico–Nicaragua;
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); Pakistan–China; Panama–Peru; Panama—and the Separate
Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; Peru–Republic of Korea; Peru–China; Singapore–
Australia; Thailand–Australia; United States–Australia; United States–Bahrain; United States–Chile; United
States–Colombia; United States–Jordan; United States–Morocco; United States–Panama; United States–Oman;
United States–Peru; United States–Singapore.

84. Australia–Chile; Dominican Republic–Central America–United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR);
EC; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; Japan–Peru; Japan–Switzerland; Republic of Korea–
United States; Mexico–Nicaragua; North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); United States–Australia;
United States–Bahrain; United States–Chile; United States–Colombia; United States–Morocco; United States–
Panama; United States–Oman; United States–Peru; United States–Singapore.

85. This is, in general terms, the content of ACTA section on digital enforcement.
86. Australia–Chile; Brunei Darussalam–Japan; Chile–China; Chile–Japan; Chile–Mexico; China–Costa Rica;
China–New Zealand; Costa Rica–Mexico; Dominican Republic–Central America–United States Free Trade
Agreement (CAFTA-DR); East African Community (EAC); EC; EFTA–Mexico; EFTA–Montenegro; EU–
Cameroon; EU–CARIFORUM; EU–Chile; EU–Colombia; EU–Republic of Korea; EU–Peru; EU–South Africa;
European Economic Area (EEA); European Free Trade Association (EFTA); India–ASEAN; Japan–Indonesia;
Japan–Malaysia; Japan–Mexico; Japan–Peru; Japan–Singapore; Japan–Switzerland; Japan–Thailand; Japan–
Viet Nam; New Zealand–Malaysia; Nicaragua and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen
and Matsu; North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA); Panama–Peru; Panama—and the Separate
Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu; Peru–Republic of Korea; Singapore–Australia;
Thailand–Australia; Thailand–New Zealand; Trans-Paciﬁc Strategic Economic Partnership; Turkey–Chile.

References

Abbott, F.M. (2004) The Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health and the Contradictory Trend

in Bilateral and Regional Free Trade Agreements, QUAKER, Occasional Paper No. 14, Geneva.

Abbott, F.M. (2005) ‘Toward a New Era of Objective Assessment in the Field of TRIPS and Variable Geometry for the

Preservation of Multilateralism’, Journal of International Economic Law, 8(1), 77–100.

260

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

Intellectual Property in Preferential Trade Agreements

Xavier Seuba

Abbott, F.M. (2006) Intellectual Property Provisions of Bilateral and Regional Trade Agreements in Light of U.S.

Federal Law. ICTSD, Geneva.

Burrell, R. and Weatherall, K. (2008) ‘Exporting Controversy? Reactions to the Copyright Provisions of the US-
Australia Free Trade Agreement: Lessons for U.S. Trade Policy’, Journal of Law, Technology and Policy,
2008(2), 259–319.

Correa, C.M. (2004a) Protection of Intellectual Property and Public Health within the Framework of the Chile-US

Trade Agreement, QUNO, Occasional Paper No. 1, Geneva.

Correa, C. (2004b) ‘Investment Protection in Bilateral and Free Trade Agreements: Implications for the Granting of

Compulsory Licenses’, Michigan Journal of International Law, 26, 331–53.

Correa, C. (2004c) Tratados Bilaterales de Inversio´ n, ¿Agentes de Normas Mundiales Nuevas para la Proteccio´ n de

los Derechos de Propiedad Intelectual? GRAIN, Barcelona.

Cottier, T. and Veron, P. (eds) (2008) Concise International and European IP Law. Kluwer Law International,

Dordrecht.

Drahos, P. (2005) ‘BITS and BIPS: Bilateralism in Intellectual Property’, The Journal of World Intellectual Property

Law, 4(6), 791–808.

European Commission (2004) Strategy for the Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights in Third Countries, 10

November 2004, Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union, 26/6/2005, C 129/3-C 129/16.

Fink, C. (2011) ‘Intellectual Property Rights’, in J.-P. Chauffour and J.-C. Maur (eds), Preferential Trade Agreement

Policies for Development: A Handbook. The World Bank, Washington, DC, pp. 387–405.

Heath, C. and Kamperman Sanders, A. (eds.) (2007) Intellectual Property and Free Trade Agreements. Hart

Publishing, Oxford and Portland, pp. 87–126.

Matthews, D. and Mu~noz-Tellez, V. (2006) ‘Bilateral Technical Assistance and TRIPS: The United States, Japan and
the European Communities in a Comparative Perspective’, Journal of World Intellectual Property, 9(6), 629–53.

Michajlovicˇ, G. (1992) Law-Making in the International Community. Martinus Nijhoff, Dordrecht.
Roffe, P. (2004) Bilateral Agreements and a TRIPS plus World, Quaker International Affairs Programme, TRIPS

Issues Paper No. 4, Ottawa.

Roffe, P. and Santa Cruz, M. (2006) Los Derechos de Propiedad Intelectual en los Acuerdos de Libre Comercio

Celebrados por Paı´ ses de Ame´ rica Latina con Paı´ ses Desarrollados. CEPAL, Santiago de Chile.

Roffe, P. Vivas-Eugui, D. and Vea, G. (2007) Maintaining Policy Space for Development. ICTSD, Geneva.
Seuba, X. (2009) Health Protection in the European and Andean Association Agreement. HAI, Amsterdam.
Seuba, X. (2013a) ‘Checks and Balances in the Intellectual Property Enforcement Field: Reconstructing EU Trade
Agreements’, in C. Geiger (Dir), Constructing European Intellectual Property: Achievements and News
Perspectives. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham.

Seuba, X. (2013b) Propiedad Intelectual, Competencia y Aspectos Regulatorios del Medicamento. Determinantes

Internacionales y Polı´tica Pu´blica, PUJ-ICTSD, Bogota´.

Stewart, T.P. (1995) The GATT Uruguay Round: A Negotiation History. Kluwer Law International, The Hague.
UNCTAD-ICTSD (2005) Resource Book on TRIPS and Development. Cambridge University Press, New York,

Geneva.

UNDP (2013) Human Development Report. The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World. UNDP,

New York.

Valde´s, R. and Tavengwa, R. (2012) Intellectual Property Provisions in Regional Trade Agreements, WTO Staff

Working Paper ERSD-2012-21, World Trade Organization, Geneva.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
The Journal of World Intellectual Property (2013) Vol. 16, no. 5–6

261


