Silhouette v.  Hartlauer - Fortress Europe? 

Martyn HA”* 

On 16 July  1998, the  European Court  of Justice  (EcJ)  gave  its Decision  in  the 
case  of Silhouette International Schmied GmbH G Co. KG tz  Hartlauer Handelsgesellschaft 
mbH.’  This case, widely reported in the popular media, is  an important development 
for  parallel  import  activity.  This  article  reviews  the  Opinion  of  Advocate-General 
Jacobs as well as the judgment  itself and its effect. 

I.  THE FACTS 

The plaintiff,  Sdhouette, is  an  Austrian  company which  produces high-quality 
spectacles.  The  spectacles are  distributed world-wide  under  the  word  and  picture 
trade  mark  “Silhouette”,  which  is  registered  in  Austria  and  internationally.  In 
Austria,  Silhouette spectacles are  supplied  to  selected opticians.  In  other  countries, 
Silhouette relies  on subsidiary companies or  distributors. The Defendant, Hartlauer, 
also  sells  spectacles in  Austria  and  seeks  to  solicit  customers by  maintaining  lower 
prices. 

In  October  1995,  21,000  outdated  model  spectacle  frames  were  sold  by 
Silhouette  to  Union  Trading,  with  Sdhouette  specifically  directing  its  sales 
representative to inform the purchaser that it was restricted to selhng the h e s  only 
in  Bulgaria  or  the  States  of  the  former  Soviet  Union.  Whether  this  actually 
happened is unclear.  In November, the goods were delivered to Sofia. In December, 
Hartlauer  acquired the  goods,  offering them  for  sale  in  Austria.  Again,  the  factual 
background is  uncertain,  since it  has  not  been  confirmed that  Hartlauer purchased 
the goods directly from Union Trading or whether a thrd party was  involved. 

Silhouette sought an order to prohibit Hartlauer fiom marketing, under  its trade 
mark, spectacles or spectacle frames which were not  put  on the market  in the  EEA 
by  it  or with  its  consent.  Its  argument, based  on  the  Austrian  law  relating  to  the 
protection of trade marks (the Markenschutzgesetz) on the unfair competition law and 

*  Norton Rose, London, U.K. 
This is  a  follow-up  to the  article published  by  the  author  in  the July  1998  issue  of the Journal:  see 
’ Case No. C-355/96. 

TradeMark Rights and  Parallel  Importr  in Europe,  1 J.W.I.P.  4, p.  621, at p. 632. 

810 

T H E  JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

on  the  C i d  Code,  was  that  its  trade-marks  rights  had  not  been  exhausted because 
the  Trade  Marks  Directive  (the  Directive)2 provides  that  such  rights  can  only  be 
exhausted by  reason  of marketing within  the  EEA by  the  trade-mark  owner or with 
the  trade-mark  owner’s  consent. In  its  defence,  Hartlauer contended  that  Silhouette 
sold  the  fiames  without  any  specific  instruction  that  import  into  the  Community 
was  excluded.  It  also  pointed  out  that  the  Markenschutzgesetz  &d  not  provide  for 
prohibitory injunctions in these circumstances. 

Silhouette  failed  in  its  action  in  the  Regional  Court  (hndesgerickt)  and  the 
Higher  Regional  Court  (Oberlandesgericht).  It  appealed  to  the  Oberster  Gericktskof 
(Supreme Court of Judicature). The  Oberster  Gerickfshof submitted two questions to 
the ECJ: 
(i) 

Is  Article  7(1) of  the  Trade Marks  Directive,  to  approximate the  laws  of 
the  Member  States relating to  trade  marks,  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning 
that  the  trade  mark  entitles  its  proprietor  to  prohibit  a  h r d  party  fiom 
using  the  mark for goods which  have  been  put  on the  market under that 
mark in a State which is not  a contracting State? 
May  a  proprietor  of  the  trade  mark,  on  the  basis  of Article  7(1) of  the 
Trade  Marks  Directive  alone,  seek  an  order  that  the  thrd  party  cease 
using the trade mark for goods which have  been put  on the market under 
that mark in a  State which is not a contracting State? 

(ii) 

The procedure  of  the  ECJ is  that  all  questions referred  for  a  determination by 
the  ECJ  are  first  considered by  an Advocate-General,  who  delivers his  non-binding 
Opinion to the Court. 

11.  THE OPINION OF ADVOCATE-GENERAL 

JACOBS3 

Since both  questions refer  to Article  7(1) of the  Directive, it is worth  setting it 

out in full: 

“The trade  mark shall not entitle  the  proprietor to  prohibit  its  use  in relation to  goods 
which have  been put  on  the  market  in  the  Community  under  that  trade  mark by  the 
proprietor or with his consent.” 
In  giving his  Opinion  on the  first  question, the  Advocate-General was  of the 
view that the language excluded international exhaustion, though  not  expressly,  since 
Article 7(1) sets  out the circumstances in whch trade-mark  rights are exhausted, and 
this  must  naturally be read  as doing so comprehensively. 

The  Advocate-General  also  noted  that  the  legislative  history  of  the  Directive 
confirms  that  international  exhaustion  is  excluded.  The  Commission’s  original 
proposal would  have  imposed  international  exhaustion,  but  its  subsequent proposal 

Fiat Council Directive 89/104/E~c of 21 December 1988. 
Delivered on 29 January 1998. 

SILHOUETTE V HARTLAUER - FORTRESS EUROPE? 

811 

was  amended  to  limit  the  exhaustion  principle  to  products  marketed  in  the 
Community. Clearly, the amendment, and its effect, were deliberate. 

The  Advocate-General  was  attracted  to  the  argument  that  the  function  of  a 
trade  mark  is  to  identie  the  origin  of  the  product,  not  to  enable  the  owner  to 
divide  up  the  market  and  to  exploit  price  dlfferentials.  However,  while  the 
Advocate-General noted that international exhaustion could bring price  competition 
and  advantages  for consumers, he  concluded that  the  ECJ’S case-law  was  developed 
in  the  context  of  the  Community,  and  not  the  world-wide  market.  While  he 
acknowledged that  certain  elements  of  the  Directive  were  discretionary,  this  could 
not  mean  that  some  Member  States  could  apply  international  exhaustion  while 
others did  not.  This would  lead  to  barriers  in  the  internal market,  a  result  entirely 
contrary to the harmonisation aim of the Directive. 

Accordmgly,  the  Advocate-General  was  of the  opinion  that  Article  7(1)  meant 
that  a proprietor  of a trade mark is  entitled to prevent  a  third party fiom using  the 
trade mark in relation to goods which have been put  on the market outside the EEA. 
The second  question, whether  an  injunction  could be  granted  on the  basis  of 
Article 7(1),  was  raised because the Markenschutzgesetz  does not provide for any right 
to  obtain  a  prohibitory injunction  or make  any other  provision  which  corresponds 
to  Article  51(a)4 of  the  Directive.  In  fact,  a  prohibitory  injunction  could  only  be 
sought  in  respect  of  trade-mark  infiingement  under  the  Austrian  law  on  unfair 
competition  (Unluuteren  Wettbewerb),  and  only  then  if  there  was  some  risk  of 
confusion, which wdl  not be the  case where the original products of the trade-mark 
proprietor are being imported. 

The  Advocate-General  noted  that  Article  5( 1) (a)  had  not  been  incorporated 
into  the  Markenschutzgesetz  but  stated the  accepted position  that  national  courts are 
under  a  duty  to  give  trade  marks  the  same  protection  as  if  each  provision  of  the 
Directive had been  expressly transposed into national law. 

Accordingly, the  Opinion  on the  second question was  that, even if Article 7(1) 
alone  has  been  transposed,  a  proprietor  of  a  trade  mark  is  entitled  to  obtain  a 
prohibitory injunction. 

111.  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  COURT 

This  judgement 

is  relatively  short  and  concise,  the  substantive  element 
(excluding the introduction and a recitation of the facts) being only three pages.  It is 
annexed to this article. 

The  judgment,  in  relation  to  the  first  question,  focuses  on  whether  the 
Directive  allows  Member  States  to  have  a  rule  of  international  exhaustion. 

“_.. exclusive rights to  prevent all third parties  not  having the  consent of the  Owner from  using in  the 
course  of trade  any sign  which  is  identical  with  the  trade  mark  in  relation  to  goods  or  services  which  are 
identical to  those for whch the trade mark is registered.” 

a12 

THE JOURNAL O F  WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

Article  7(l), in the  Court’s view,  clearly only obliges Member States to provide for 
exhaustion withm the  Community. However, although the  question of international 
exhaustion remained open it was inconsistent with the objectives of the Directive, in 
particular  as  stated  in  the  Recitals  to  the  Directive,  to  allow  individual Member 
States  to  apply  international  exhaustion  whde  others  provided  for  community 
exhaustion only. The Court believed that  this would inevitably give rise  to  barriers 
to the 6ee movement of goods. 

The ECJ noted that Article 7 could be  extended to non-Member countries but 
this  was  the  responsibihty of  the  Community  as a  whole,  not  individual Member 
States. 

The answer to the first question was  as follows: 
‘‘National rules providing for the  exhaustion of trade-mark  rights  in  respect of products 
put  on  the  market  outside  the  EEA under  the  mark  by  the  proprietor  or  with  his 
consent are  contrary to Article 7(1) of the Directive.” 

With  regard to the  second question, the ECJ noted that t h s  was  raised  because 
the Markenschutzgesetz did not contain any provision corresponding to Article 5(1). It 
c o h m e d  that c o h s i o n  was  not an issue where the allegedly infiinging goods are, 
or were originally, the products of the trade-mark  proprietor. 

However, whde  the  Court  agreed  that  the  Directive  did  not  oblige  Member 
States  to  implement  provisions  allowing  a  trade-mark  proprietor  to  obtain 
injunctions to prevent infringement, that  obligation was  contained in Article  5, not 
in  Article  7.  Moreover,  the  ECJ  noted  that  it  is  settled  case-law  that  Directives 
cannot be  relied  upon  by  individuals. Accordingly, the  ECJ’S answer  to  the  second 
question was: 

“Article 7(1)  cannot  be  interpreted  as  meaning that  the  proprietor  of  a  trade  mark  is 
entitled, on the basis  of that provision alone, to obtain an order restraining a  third party 
&om using his trade  mark  for  products which have  been put  on the  market  outside the 
EEA under that  mark  by  the proprietor or with his consent.” 

IV.  COMMENT 

Silhouette  v.  Hartlauer  is  unquestionably  a  landmark  Decision  in  the  area  of 
parallel  imports in  Europe.  The  Opinion  of  the  Advocate-General  attracted some 
criticism &om academic writers as promoting “Fortress Europe” to the detriment of 
consumers within Europe. When  the Decision of the ECJ was  announced there was 
much coverage in the popular meha,  the general tenor of which was  critical of the 
Decision. This was,  to some extent, due to the fact that the reports relied heavily on 
the  views  of  the  major  retailers in  the  United  Kingdom  such  as Tesco  and  Ada, 
who  have  acquired and  sold parallel imported goods at  their stores at  a  dlscount to 
the normal retail price in the United Kingdom. 

SILHOUETTE K HriRTLAUER - FORTRESS EUROPE? 

813 

It  is,  however,  difficult to  fault  the  reasoning behmd  the  ECJ'S Decision.  The 
legislative history  of the  Directive,  the  aims of  the  Directive  and  the  consequences 
that  would  follow  if  Member  States  were  allowed  the  hcretion  to  apply 
international exhaustion,  all lead  inexorably  to  the  conclusion  reached  by  the  ECJ. 
The  issues  raised  in  relation  to  Fortress  Europe  and  the  effect  on  consumen  in 
Europe while vahd  concerns, are  essentially  political issues  to  be  determined by  the 
Commission and  the  European Parliament by,  for  example,  entering  into  reciprocal 
treaty  arrangements  with  countries  outside  the  EEA. The  writer  of  this  article 
submits that the Court was  right not to be swayed by  these considerations. 

The  Court  was,  it  is  submitted,  also  correct  in  not  following  the  Advocate- 
General's  Opinion  on  whether  an  injunction  could  be  obtained  on  the  basis  of 
Article  7(1).  Article  5 is  a  mandatory term  of  the  Directive  and  Austria, in  having 
no equivalent provision in its trade-mark  law, appears therefore to be in breach of its 
obligations. The ECJ did  not,  however,  accept that  the  absence  of such  a  provision 
in Austrian  trade-mark  law was  a reason  to  find  that  Article 7(1)  could by  itself be 
interpreted as giving a trade-mark owner the right to obtain an injunction. 

That  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  this  case  has  settle all  aspects  of this  complex 
area  of  the  law.  In  particular,  some  confision  had  been  caused  by  the  fact  that 
Advocate-General Jacobs  was  prepared to consider the  questions on the  assumption 
that  Silhouette had  not  consented to its  goods being marketed in the EEA. The ECJ 
made  no  reference  to  this  issue  at  all.  There  are  two  possible  interpretations of  its 
silence: 
(i) 

the  Advocate-General  and 

the  ECJ  were  simply  concerning 
that 
themselves with  the  strict  legal  questions  and,  because  of  the  uncertain 
factual position on t h s  issue, had to make the assumption they dld, so that 
nothing should be inferred fi-om this  assumption; or 
that  the  assumption  made  is,  in  fact,  now  a  presumption  that  unless 
otherwise established, first marketing of products outside the EEA does not 
permit  sale  of  products  withm  the  EEA, i.e.  that  sale  outside  the  EEA 
creates an implied restriction on resale within the EEA. 

(ii) 

The first alternative is possible--and  indeed it is  not  the finction  of the ECJ to 
determine  questions of  fact-but 
it  would  have  been  open  to  both  the  Advocate- 
General and  the  Court  to indlcate,  even  while  answering the  questions in  the  way 
they  did, what  their  view was  on  Silhouette's inabdity  to  prove  that  the  restriction 
had been  communicated to Union  Trading. The alternative view avoids  the  difficult 
question  of whether  the  restriction should be  communicated by  the  first  purchaser 
to  its  downstream  purchasers  in  order  to  be  bind~ng.~ It  does,  however,  create  a 
heavy burden on the importer, The issue  to be resolved, therefore, is if a trade-mark 

See  RoussekUclaf  S.A. v.  Hockley  International  Limited  and  Anor,  [1996] R.P.C. 441, and the judgment of 

Jacob J., who stated that restrictions need to be communicated to every person down the  chain. 

814 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD  INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 

proprietor  sells  products  outside  the  EEA but  does  not--or  cannot  prove  that  it 
resales  to  within  the  EEA,  d courts  now  presume  that  such  a 
did-restrict 
restriction was  intended? 

Another  issue  which  remains  outstanding, and  is  not  addressed by  this  case  at 
all,  is  what  is  meant  by  first  marketing  of  products  in  the  EEA. Although  the 
spectacle frames were  delivered to  Sofia, it  has  been  suggested that  the  contract for 
sale  to  Union  Trading occurred  within  the  EEA (either in  Austria  or  the  United 
Kingdom).  There  is  very  little  judicial  guidance  on  what  is  meant  by  “first 
marketing”, and  certain writers have  suggested that  Silhouette  u.  Hartlauer  is  a case  of 
re-importation,  not  parallel  importation,  so  that  in  such  cases  the  trade-mark 
proprietor should not  be  entitled  to  prevent re-importation6.  Ths  author disagrees 
with  those  views  in  the  context  of  this  case,  but  there  is  undoubtedly a  lack  of 
clarity  on  this  fundamental  question.  As  ever,  both  of  these  issues  await  further 
clarification from the ECJ. 

0 Norton Rose 

Annex 

Judgment of the Court in Case No. C-355/96:  Silhouette International Schmied  GmbH 

G Co. KG tz Hartlauer Handelsgesellschafr mbH. 

... 
Question  1 
15. By  its first  question the  Oberster Gerichtshofis in substance asking whether  national 
rules  providing for exhaustion of trade-mark  rights in  respect  of products put  on the  market 
outside the EEA under  that mark by  the proprietor or with his consent are contrary to Article 
7(1) of the Directive. 

16.  It  is  to  be  noted  at  the  outset  that  Article  5  of  the  Directive  defines  the  ‘rights 
conferred  by  a  trade  mark‘  and  Article  7  contains  the  rule  concerning  ‘exhaustion of  the 
rights conferred by a trade mark‘. 

17.  According to  Article 5(1) of the Directive, the registered trade mark  confers on the 
proprietor  exclusive  rights  therein.  In  addition,  Article  5(l)(a) provides that  those  exclusive 
rights entitle the proprietor  to prevent all third parties not having his  consent &om use  in the 
course  of trade  of,  inter  alia,  any  sign  identical with  the  trade  mark  in  relation to  goods  or 
services which  are identical to those for  which  the  trade  mark  is registered. Article  5(3) sets 
out  a non-exhaustive  list  of the kinds of practice which  the proprietor  is  entitled to prohibit 

’ See  €?  Hays  and  P. Hansen,  Silhouette  is  not  the  Proper  Case from  which  to  Decide  the  Parallel  Importation 
Question, [I9981 E.I.P.R. 277. See also  W.R.  Cornish,  Trade Marks: Portcullisfor  the E m ,  [1998] E.I.PR.  172. 

SILHOUETTE K HARTLAUER - FORTRESS EUROPE? 

815 

under  paragraph  1, including,  in  particular,  importing  or  exporting  goods  under  the  trade 
mark concerned. 

18. Like  the  rules  laid  down  in Article  6  of  the  Directive, which  set  certain limits  to 
the  effects of  a trade mark, Article 7  states  that,  in  the  circumstances which  it  specifies,  the 
exclusive rights conferred by  the trade mark are exhausted, with the result that the proprietor 
is  no  longer  entitled  to  prohibit  use  of the  mark.  Exhaustion  is  subject first  of  all  to  the 
condition that the goods have been put on the market by the proprietor or with his consent. 
According to the text of the Directive itself, exhaustion occurs only where the products have 
been  put  on the  market  in the  Community  (in  the  EEA since the  EEA Agreement  entered 
into force). 

19.  No  argument  has  been  presented  to  the  Court  that  the  Directive  could  be 
interpreted  as providing for the  exhaustion of the  right  conferred by  a trade  mark in respect 
of goods put  on the market by  the proprietor  or with  his  consent irrespective of where  they 
were put on the market. 

20.  On the  contrary, Hartlauer and the  Swedish Government  have  maintained that  the 
Directive left the Member States 6ee to provide in their national law for exhaustion, not  only 
in respect of products put  on the market in the EEA but also  of those put  on the market in 
non-Member  countries. 

21.  The  interpretation  of  the  Directive  proposed  by  Hartlauer  and  the  Swedish 
Government  assumes, having regard to the wording  of Article  7, that the Directive, like the 
Court’s case-law  concerning Articles  30  and 36  of the EC Treaty, is limited to  requiring the 
Member States to provide for exhaustion within the  Community, but  that Article 7 does not 
comprehensively resolve  the  question  of  exhaustion  of  rights  conferred by  the  trade  mark, 
thus  leaving it  open  to  the  Member  States  to  adopt  rules  on exhaustion going hrther than 
those explicitly laid down in Article 7 of the Directive. 
22.  As  Silhouette,  the  Austrian,  French,  German,  Italian  and  United  Kingdom 
Governments and  the  Commission have  all argued, such an interpretation  is  contrary to the 
wording of Article 7 and to the scheme and purpose of the rules of the Directive concerning 
the rights which a trade mark confers on its proprietor. 

laws  of  the  Member  States’,  the  Directive  none 

23.  In  that  respect,  although the  Third  Recital  in the  Preamble to the Directive states 
that ‘it does not appear to be necessary at present to undertake flll-scale approximation of the 
trade-mark 
the  less  provides  for 
harmonisation in relation to  substantive rules  of  central importance  in  this sphere, that  is  to 
say,  according  to  that  same  recital,  the  rules  concerning  those  provisions  of  national  law 
which  most  directly affect  the  hnctioning of  the  internal  market,  and  that  recital  does not 
preclude the harmonisation relating to those rules fiom being complete. 

24.  The  First  Recital  in  the  Preamble to  the  Directive notes  that  the  trade-mark  laws 
applicable in the Member  States contain disparities which  may impede the fiee movement of 
goods  and  fireedom  to  provide  services and  may  distort  competition  within  the  common 
market,  so  that  it  is  necessary,  in  view  of  the  establishment and  functioning  of  the  internal 
market,  to approximate the  laws  of Member  States. The Ninth  Recital  emphasizes  that  it  is 
fundamental, in  order  to  facilitate the  fiee  movement  of  goods  and  services, to  ensure that 
registered trade  marks enjoy the  same  protection  under  the legal systems of  all the  Member 
States, but  that this should not prevent Member States 6om granting at their option extensive 
protection to those trade marks which have a reputation. 

25.  In the light of those Recitals, Articles 5 to  7 of the Directive must be  construed as 
embodying a  complete harmonisation of the rules relating to the  rights  conferred by  a  trade 
mark. That  interpretation,  it may be  added, is  borne  out  by  the fact that Article 5  expressly 
leaves it open to the Member  States to maintain or introduce certain rules specifically defined 
by  the  Community  legislature. Thus,  in  accordance with  Article  5(2), to  which  the  Ninth 

816 

THE JOURNAL OF WORLD INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY 

Recital refers, the Member  States have the option to grant more extensive protection to trade 
marks with a reputation. 

26.  Accordingly, the  Directive cannot  be  interpreted  as  leaving it  open  to  the  Member 
States to provide in their domestic law for exhaustion of the rights conferred by  a trade mark 
in respect of products put on the market in non-Member  countries. 

27.  This, moreover, is the only interpretation which is hlly capable of ensuring that the 
purpose  of  the  Directive  is  achieved,  namely  to  safeguard  the  functioning  of  the  internal 
market. A situation in which  some Member  States could provide for  international exhaustion 
while  others provided for  Community exhaustion only would  inevitably give rise  to barriers 
to the fkee movement of goods and the freedom to provide services. 

28.  Contrary  to  the  arguments of  the  Swedish Government,  it  is  no  objection  to  that 
interpretation  that  since  the  Directive was  adopted  on the  basis  of  Article  lOOa  of  the  EC 
Treaty,  which  governs the  approximation of  the  laws  of the  Member  States  concerning  the 
functioning  of the  internal  market,  it  cannot  regulate  relations between  the  Member  States 
and non-Member  countries, with the result that Article 7 is to be interpreted as  meaning that 
the Directive applies only to intra-Community  relations. 
29.  Even if Article  lOOa  of the  Treaty were to be  construed in  the  sense argued for by 
the  Swedish Government,  the  fact  remains  that  Article  7,  as  has  been  pointed  out  in  this 
judgment,  is  not  intended  to  regulate  relations  between  Member  States  and  non-member 
countries but to define the rights of proprietors of trade marks in the Community. 

30.  Finally, the  Community authorities could always extend the exhaustion provided for 
by  Article  7  to  products  put  on  the  market  in  non-Member  countries  by  entering  into 
international agreements in that sphere, as was done in the context of the EEA Agreement. 

31.  In  the  light  of the  foregoing, the  answer to be  given to  the  first  question must  be 
that national rules providing for exhaustion of trade-mark  rights in respect of products put on 
the  market  outside  the  EEA under  that  mark  by  the  proprietor  or  with  his  consent  are 
contrary to Article 7(1) of the Directive, as amended by the EEA Agreement. 

Question 2 
32.  By  its second question the  Oberster  Gerichtshofis in substance asking whether Article 
7(1)  of  the  Directive  can  be  construed  as meaning  that  the  proprietor  of  a  trade  mark  is 
entitled, on the basis  of that provision alone, to obtain an order restraining a  third party fkom 
using its mark  for  products which  have  been  put  on the  market  outside the  EEA under  that 
mark by the proprietor  or with his consent. 

33.  In  its order for  reference,  as  clarified subsequently by  letter, the  Oberster Gerichtshof 

has pointed out: 

- that the  second question was put  because the Markenschutzgesetz  does not  provide for 
any  right  to  obtain  a  prohibitory  injunction,  nor  does  it  contain  any  provision 
correspondmg  to  Article  5(l)(a)  of  the  Directive. A  prohibitory  injunction  may  be 
sought  in  respect  of  a  trade-mark  infkingement  only  if  there  is  at  the  same  time  a 
breech of Paragraph 9  of the UWG, the  application of which pre-supposes  the risk  of 
confusion,  which  is  not  the  case  where  the  original  products  of  the  trade-mark 
proprietor are concerned; 

- in Austrian law,  at least  according to current academic legal writing,  the proprietor  of 
a  trade  mark  has  no  right  to  obtain  a  prohibitory  injunction  against  a  person  who 
makes  parallel  imports  or  reimports  of  trade-marked  goods,  unless  the  right  to  a 
prohibitory 
the 
Markenschutzgesetz. The question thus arises,  under  Austrian law,  whether  Article 7(1) 
of the  Trade Marks Directive, which  has  the same content  as  Paragraph  lOa(1) of the 

is  already  available  under  Paragraph 

lOa(1)  of 

injunction 

SILHOUETTE  V HARTLAUER - FORTRESS  EUROPE? 

817 

Murkenschutzgesetz, provides for such a right  to apply for a prohibitory injunction  and 
whether  the  proprietor  of  the  trade  mark  can  therefore  seek, solely  on  the  basis  of 
that provision, an  order that a  third party cease using the  trade mark for goods which 
have been put on the market under  that mark outside the EEA. 

34.  Under  the scheme of the Directive the rights conferred by  a trade mark are defined 
by  Article  5,  while  Article  7  contains  an  important  qualification  with  respect  to  that 
definition,  in  that  it  provides  that  the  rights  conferred  by  Article  5  do  not  entitle  the 
proprietor  to  prohibit  the  use  of  the  trade  mark  where  the  conditions  laid  down  in  that 
provision are satisfied. 

35.  Accordingly, while  it  is  undeniable  that  the  Directive  requires  Member  States  to 
implement  provisions on the  basis  of which  the  proprietor  of a trade  mark, when  his  rights 
are infringed, must be able  to obtain an order restraining third parties fiom making use  of his 
mark, that requirement is  imposed, not by  Article 7, but by Article 5 of the Directive. 

36.  That  being so, it  is  to  be  remembered,  first, that,  according to  settled  case-law  of 
the  Court,  a  Directive  cannot  of  itself  impose  obligations  on  an  individual  and  cannot 
therefore be  relied  upon  as  such against  an  individual. Second,  according to  the  same  case- 
law, when  applying domestic law,  whether adopted before or after the Directive, the national 
court that  has  to  interpret  that law  must do so, as  far as  possible,  in the light of the wording 
and the purpose of the Directive so  as to achieve the result  it has in view and thereby comply 
with  the  third  paragraph  of  Article  189  of  the  Treaty  (see,  inter  &a,  Case  C-106/89, 
Murleasing v.  La Comercial lnternucionul  de Alimentucio’n,  [1990] E.C.R.  1-4135, paragraphs 6 and 
8, and Case C-91/92,  Fuccini  Dari v.  Recreb,  [1994] E.C.R.  1-3325, paragraphs 20 and 26). 

37.  The  answer to  be  given  to  the  second question must  therefore be  that,  subject to 
the  national  court’s  duty  to  interpret,  so  far  as  possible,  domestic  law  in  conformity  with 
Community  law,  Article  7(1) of  the  Directive  cannot  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  the 
proprietor  of a trade mark is  entitled, on the basis  of that provision alone, to  obtain an order 
restraining a  third  party from using his  trade  mark  for products which  have  been  put  on the 
market outside the EEA under  that mark by the proprietor  or with his consent. 

38. ... ” 


