The  (2009) Vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 153–173

doi: 10.1111/j.1747-1796.2009.00355.x

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black
Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad: Measures
the People’s Republic of China Undertook
to Secure the Protection of Olympic-
related Intellectual Property Rights

Brenda Pamela Mey (Ongech)
Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich

After a hard-fought battle that saw China clinch the bid to host the XXIX Olympic Games, the
country put comparable efforts into upgrading its intellectual property laws, not only to bring
them into consonance with the provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), but also to accord the Olympic-related intellectual
property rights the appropriate protection. Despite these efforts, China is still plagued with a
myriad of TRIPS compliance problems. The Olympic Games presented the opportunity that
China needed to light the torch that would help it repair the damage caused to its image by
issues such as reverse engineering of almost everything under the sun, as well as those relating to
enforcement and protection of intellectual property rights (IPRs), etc., and cause it to be seen in
a positive light by the rest of the world. The world watched China closely for the weeks of the
Olympic Games and will be watching it, even after the Olympic torch has ﬂickered out, to see
whether the enforcement and protection of IPRs will outlast the Olympic ceremony.

Keywords Olympic Games; Beijing Olympics; intellectual property rights; IOC

In July 2001, China won the bid at an International Olympic Committee (IOC)
session in Moscow to host the Games of the XXIX Olympiad in 2008. Shortly after
this memorable event on 11 December 2001, China joined the World Trade
Organization (WTO) after what some intellectual property (IP) experts have termed
a long and a problematic courtship (Yu, 2006, p. 945). Since then, the country, which
is often referred to as the ‘‘IP black hole’’, has made great strides toward strengthening
its IP regimes. This has resulted in the comprehensive revision of its patent, copyright
and trademark legislations, as well as the amendment of these laws to conform to the
provisions of key IP conventions and treaties (Donatuti, 2007, pp. 213–5; Drezner,
2007; Yu, 2006, pp. 908–11). Nevertheless, the enforcement of IP laws in China
remains unreliable and the country is still considered to excel in all sorts of trade in
pirated products that range from counterfeit software to fake versions of Viagra and
other trademark rip-offs. Needless to say, some IP experts have contended that the
existing IP laws in China do not send a clear message to pirates and counterfeiters,
who have continued to thrive on proﬁts made from IP technologies duplicated from
more innovative companies (Omario, 2007, pp. 1264–8).

r 153

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Indeed, the stunning opening performances, brilliant visuals and state-of-the-
art technology that accompanied the Olympic Games accorded China the unique
opportunity to enjoy the international spotlight. Now that the glittering event held
at the Bird’s Nest is a thing of the past and the last ﬂoodlights on the stadium have
been switched off, the cover hiding the hot issues in China, like the issue of
protecting and enforcing intellectual property rights (IPRs), and of compliance with
the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
has been lifted again. Although these are signiﬁcant issues that warrant considera-
tion and action, this article will focus on China’s inadequate protection and
enforcement of IPRs, and the potential that the lack of strong IP protection had
to ruin the Olympic Games, an event of the highest international sporting standard.
Through the preparation for the Olympics, China showed the rest of the world that
it was capable of organizing and allocating its resources in superb ways. Yet for all
the progress made, it was, and still is essential, given the fact that protection of IPRs
was one of the most important conditions for staging the Olympic Games (Mendel
and Yijun, 2003, pp. 33–4), for China to demonstrate that it has in place an IP
system that can be relied on, not only to safeguard Olympic-related, but also other
facets of IPRs (Center for Advanced Defence Studies, 2006).

This article will also examine whether China took the advantage proffered by
the Beijing Olympics to palliate criticisms over a lack of cogent IP laws within
its borders by formulating measures designed at strengthening the protection
and enforcement of IPRs, not just related to the Olympic Games but also other
forms of IPRs as well. The measures that China introduced to protect Olympic-
related IPRs and Olympic assets, and how effective these measures were in
strengthening the overall protection and enforcement of IPRs will also be discussed,
as will the challenges that the country faced in ﬁghting the numerous IP crimes,
which if ignored, could have ruined the spirit of the Olympic Games. The article will
conclude that China could experience tremendous economic growth in the future, if
it gives the protection and enforcement of IPRs the same attention it accorded the
Olympic Games.

A Brief History of the Modern Olympic Movement

The protection of IPRs related to the Olympic Games has been said to be central to
the multi-billion-dollar Olympic enterprise. The Sydney 2000 Olympic Games,
which brought so much faith to the Olympic Movement, were the largest, and
were, thanks to the Sydney 2000 Games (Indicia and Images) Protection Act 1996, a
huge ﬁnancial success. These games netted over three billion dollars, most of which
was earned from licensing the assets owned by the IOC, namely the Olympic
symbol, motto, ﬂag, emblems, anthem, ﬂame and torch. From the large revenue
raised from these protected assets, the IOC has been able to fund and host Olympic
Games, and to play the dominant role of deﬁning the broader framework of the
global event by creating a strong Olympic atmosphere, raising public awareness of

154

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

the Olympics, encouraging community involvement in the Olympic Games and
promoting the Olympic Spirit. It is for these reasons that the protection of the
Olympic IPRs is of primary concern to the IOC (Curthoys and Kendall, 2001).
Because so much revenue is at stake, the IOC is known aggressively to protect its
IPRs whenever games of the magnitude of the Olympics are held. Indeed, the
Olympic-related IP breaches are not a new phenomenon to the organizers of the
Olympic Games. Misuse and infringement of the Olympic logos, marks and
symbols is commonly done through exploitative activities such as ambush market-
ing, counterfeiting and cyber-squatting. Thus, protecting the Olympic-related IPRs
as well as the legitimate interests of the sponsors of the Olympic Games and IP
holders is central to delivering a successful Olympics, and keeping the honour
associated with this historic festival (Donatuti, 2007, pp. 205–12).1

Although the ancient games were staged in Olympia, Greece, from about 776 BC
through to 393 AD, it took 1,503 years for the Olympics to be revived. The man
responsible for the rebirth of the modern Olympic Games was Baron Pierre de
Coubertin, who,
inﬂuenced by the events of the late nineteenth century, and
particularly by his education, believed that substantial health beneﬁts could be
derived from regular sports practice. Accordingly, to ensure that the Olympic
Games remained an enduring heritage, he formulated a plan to revive them after
their long hiatus. His vision was realized in June 1894, when delegates at a meeting
organized by the ‘‘Union des Soci ´et ´es Franc¸ aises des Sports Athl ´etiques’’ at
Sorbonne, in Paris, voted to hold modern Olympic Games in Athens, Greece in
1896. This marked the beginning of an extraordinary event that has now lasted for
over a century. Pleased with the success of the games in Greece, Baron Pierre de
Coubertin encouraged the organizers to consider globalizing participation and
competition in the games. To facilitate this, Baron Pierre de Coubertin founded the
IOC in 1894. The IOC is an international, non-governmental, non-proﬁt organiza-
tion headquartered in Lausanne, Switzerland. As originator and the supreme
authority of the Olympic Movement, the IOC is entrusted with the development
and governance of the modern Olympic Games (Kuper and Sterken, 2001).

IOC’s Measures for Protection of its Olympic IPRs

The IOC is made up of the Organizing Committees for the Olympic Games
(OCOGs), the National Olympic Committees (NOCs), the Olympic Games candi-
date cities and Olympic Games participants. The IOC entrusts the domestic
organization of the Olympic Games to the NOC of the host country as well as
to the host city itself. The NOC in turn forms an Organizing Committee for
the Olympic Games (OCOG), whose duty is to ensure the smooth running of the
Olympic Games. From the time of constitution, the OCOG communicates directly
with the IOC from which it also receives instructions. The OCOG must, in addition,
comply with the Olympic Charter (IOC, 2007), the contract entered into between
the IOC, the NOC of the host country and the host city, as well as the instructions

r 155

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

from the IOC Executive Board. There are currently three OCOGs in existence:
Beijing 2008, Vancouver 2010 and London 2012 (Nafziger, 1992, pp. 491–3, 497).
The ‘‘gatekeeper of the Olympics’’, as the IOC is often known, has a myriad of
duties, which include the control, coordination and development of Olympic Games
as sport for all in accordance with the guidelines ensconced in the Olympic Charter.
In addition, the organization is charged with the duty of ensuring compliance with
all six fundamental principles and essential values of Olympism, rules and by-laws
embodied in the Olympic Charter, determining the qualiﬁcation and the require-
ments for participation in the Olympic Games, selecting sites and the host city for
each Olympiad, and, most importantly, setting the conditions for the celebration of
the Olympic Games. In so doing, the IOC aims at ensuring that the games are
celebrated in the spirit of the Olympic Games of ancient Greece. For the IOC, the
effective management and protection of distinctive Olympic elements creates a
unique marketing thrust that is needed for attracting funds required for the various
Olympic operations and events. The key tools it uses to achieve this task are the
Olympic Charter and the host city contract. The host city contract takes precedence
over any other contract or conﬂicting action a city or its NOC may undertake. The
Olympic Charter on its part governs the organization and operation of the Olympic
Movement, and stipulates the rules and guidelines for the celebration of the
Olympic Games. To be eligible for participation in the Olympic Games, the NOC
of the host country, the applicant city, entities, sponsors and participants must
observe, and abide by, the rules spelt out in the charter. The Olympic Charter gives
the IOC broad, but exclusive, ownership of rights to a number of the Olympic
properties whose administration is also regulated by the Olympic Charter. Accord-
ing to By-law 7.1 and 7.2 of the Olympic Charter, these assets include trademarks,
and other intangible property associated with the Olympic Games, such as the
Olympic symbols, ﬂag, motto, anthem, design of the Olympic ﬂag, Olympic logos,
words, creed, oath, emblems, ﬂame and torches, as well as the rights and data
relating to the organization, exploitation, broadcasting, recording, representation,
reproduction, access and dissemination of the Olympic property. By retaining all
these rights, the IOC vouchsafes for the continuity of this unique and universal
mega event. It is therefore not surprising that the IOC not only willingly goes to
great lengths to protect the commercial value of its assets, and to maintain strict
control over the same, but also enlists the help of the host city’s NOC to protect its
property (Liu, 2007, pp. 213–23; Wang, 2005, pp. 300–3). Under By-law to Rules
7–14 of the Olympic Charter, the IOC must ensure that all the Olympic assets are
accorded the protection they deserve. Through these strict control measures, the
Olympic assets are not only safeguarded as the IOC’s exclusive property, but it is
also guaranteed that the IOC retains the last word on questions relating to the
games, and to the Olympic-related assets. In fact, these rules do not just require that
the IOC takes separate national and international action to protect its assets, they
also enjoin it to dictate to the country hosting the Olympic Games, the IP standards
requisite for protecting the Olympic integrity and the Olympic assets, and for

156

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

ensuring the continuity of the Olympic Movement. Naturally, these Rules also
allow the IOC to license all or part of its rights to the Olympic symbols and marks
through the host city contract to third parties, on terms and conditions set forth by
the IOC Executive Board. A good example of such a contract is the Beijing Host
City Contract for the Olympic Games 2008, which was signed between the IOC and
the Beijing Municipality.

This contract not only protected the IOC’s Olympic-related IPRs as well as
those of the city organizing the games, but also stipulated in its articles 39–41 that
the ownership of all Olympic-related IPRs developed by the Beijing Organising
Committee for the Olympic Games (BOCOG) and the Chinese Olympic Committee
(COC) would be transferred to the IOC either immediately upon their creation, or
immediately following the completion of the Olympiad on 1 January 2009. The
Beijing Host City Contract was drawn to take precedence over any other contract,
and explicitly underscored the need for a positive image, and a healthy and fair-play
environment in the Olympics for the beneﬁt of the participant athletes, the host
city and the host country, and was, so to say, the IOC’s most effective weapon for
safeguarding the commercial value of its Olympic assets (Furrer, 2002; Levine,
2008, pp. 259–60). Other than the charter and the host city contract, the Olympic
Movement Agenda approved in June 1999 by the IOC Session in Seoul, Korea,
also stressed the importance of holding the Olympics under conditions reﬂecting a
responsible attitude towards social and environmental issues (Frey et al., 2008).

The Body of Legislation Governing Olympic-Related IPRs in China

International Treaties
The XXIX Summer Olympic Games held in Beijing has been hailed as a stunning
success that helped present a modern and highly efﬁcient China to the world
(Xinhua News Agency, 2008b). But just how adequately did China protect the IPRs
associated with this most prestigious event? Until very recently, most Asian
countries had more pressing priorities than the protection and enforcement of
IPRs. In the 1990s, IPR protection and enforcement in most of the Asian countries
took a centre stage, resulting in stricter protection and enforcement of the rights.
For example, when the United States threatened to impose sanctions against China
for failure to protect its IPRs, China stepped-up efforts and improved its IPR
system to ensure their effective protection and enforcement (Assafa, 2007; Bird,
2006; Iyengar, 2004). As a matter of fact, China, unlike most developing countries,
has an acceptable level of IP protection, which not only conforms to the global
norms and standards for the protection IP demanded by TRIPS, but is also in line
with the practices and expectations of developed WTO member countries, and can
for these reasons be employed to protect distinctive Olympic elements as well as
other segments of IPRs. However, as already stated, the effective enforcement of
these laws leaves much to be desired (Ruichun, 1998, pp. 215–8; Yu, 2006, p. 935).

r 157

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Hence, in order to protect its innumerable assets and because strong IP laws
are vital for protecting innovation, promoting international trade and investment
and for continued economic growth (Joint Press Statement, 2007), the IOC, when
selecting Beijing as a host city, required that China adopt some reasonable level of
IP to guarantee the protection of its Olympic-related IPRs (Chuanjiao, 2008;
Mendel and Yijun, 2003). Though China has not ratiﬁed the Nairobi Treaty on
the Protection of the Olympic Symbol, it has promulgated a number of domestic
laws to ensure the protection of the Olympic symbols and marks (Heermann, 2003),
and like many other WTO member states, has also ratiﬁed almost all the interna-
tional treaties and agreements that prohibit the unauthorized use of the various
forms of IPRs. These include the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property (World Intellectual property organization [WIPO], 1883), the Berne
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (WIPO, 1886), and
the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks
(WIPO, 1891). Other treaties China has signed are the Budapest Treaty on the
International Recognition of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of
Patent Procedure (WIPO, 1957), the International Convention for the Protection of
New Varieties of Plants (International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of
Plants, 1961), the Patent Cooperation Treaty (WIPO, 1970), the Convention for the
Protection of Producers of Phonograms Against Unauthorised Duplication (WIPO,
1971a), the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classiﬁcation of Goods
and Services for the Purpose of the Registration of Marks (WIPO, 1971b), the
Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the International Patent Classiﬁcation (WIPO,
1971c), Locarno Agreement Establishing an International Classiﬁcation for Indus-
trial Designs (WIPO, 1977), and TRIPS (WTO, 1994), which it signed as one of the
conditions of acceptance into the WTO. TRIPS has been in force since 1995 and is,
to date, the only comprehensive multilateral agreement that lays down the global
minimum standards required for protecting and enforcing nearly all forms of IPRs.
It encompasses the four major international IP agreements, namely, the Paris
Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention for the Protection of
Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations (WIPO,
1961) and the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits
(WIPO, 1989). The provisions of TRIPS concerning copyright and related rights,
patents, trademarks, geographical indications, industrial designs and layout designs
of integrated circuits, directly complement those of other international IP treaties
and agreements that China has ratiﬁed. TRIPS requires all member states to ensure
that strong and effective measures are available under their domestic IP laws to
ensure the taking of swift action against IPR infringers (Yusuf, 1998, pp. 3–9). In
the years after signing TRIPS, China also took steps to update and strengthen its
IPR laws and systems to make them fully consistent with WTO’s TRIPS. These
steps focused, not just on the effective enforcement of IPRs, but more on the
effective enforcement and prosecution of IP crimes at domestic level (New, 2007;
Xinhua News Agency, 2008b).

158

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

Commitment to Upholding IPR Protection Through National Legislation
Upon winning the bid to host the 2008 Olympic Games, China embarked on
enacting a set of laws aimed at strengthening the protection and enforcement of its
IPRs, not just in accordance with its obligations under the host agreement signed
with the IOC (Long, 2008), but which were also patterned so as to bring its domestic
IP laws into conformity with TRIPS, and to improve the country’s reputation for
protection and enforcement of IPRs, particularly in the aftermath of winning the
bid to host the Olympic Games (Yu, 2006, pp. 912–13). Thus, a series of Olympic-
speciﬁc IP decrees and regulations were promulgated to protect the Olympic-related
IPRs, and to preserve the special image and nature of the Olympic Games. Among
the laws that China enacted to crack down on infringement of IPRs related to the
Olympics were the Beijing Regulations on the Intellectual Property Protection of
Olympics-related Intellectual Property Rights (the Beijing Regulations) (Beijing
Municipal Intellectual Property Ofﬁce, 2001) and the Regulations on the Protection
of Olympic Symbols (the Special Regulations) (BOCOG, 2002). These laws laid out
the overall framework for the protection of IPRs relating to the 2008 Olympic
Games, and demonstrated the determination of the Chinese Government to
simplify the feasibility of the Olympic Games by protecting distinctive marks and
symbols of the Olympic Games against all forms of misuse. They also clearly
indicated the willingness of the Chinese Government to discourage infringement of
IPRs at national levels, and to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of
Olympic sponsors and right holders of Olympic symbols and marks. The Beijing
Regulations in particular were unique,
in so far as they stipulated that the
Administration of Industry and Commerce would be the primary enforcement
agency for the Olympic IPRs. In addition, these regulations provided that the
Olympic-related IPRs would also be protected by the existing Chinese IP laws,
namely the trademark law as revised in 2001 (State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce
[SIPO], 1982), the patent law (SIPO, 1984), the copyright law (SIPO, 1990), the law
against unfair competition law (SIPO, 1993), the Regulations on the Administra-
tions of Special Signs (SIPO, 1996), the Regulation on the Customs Protection of
Intellectual Property Rights (SIPO, 2003), and the portrait right law (Donatuti,
2007, pp. 223–5; Levine, 2007, pp. 221–4).

The Special Regulations on their part went the proverbial extra mile to ensure
the protection of IPRs. To begin with, article 4 thereof expressly gave the right
holders the exclusive rights to the Olympic symbols, and prohibited the misuse of
the protected marks for commercial purposes or any other purposes not permitted
by the right holders. Moreover, article 5(6) of these regulations was drawn
effectively to ﬁght ambush marketing activities that might mislead the innocent
public into thinking that there is an existing sponsorship or other supportive
relationship between the ambush marketers and the right holders of Olympic
symbols (Long, 2008). Second, the Special Regulations also created (see articles 6
and 10 thereof) an institution called the Administration for Industry and Commerce
(AIC), which was charged with the responsibility of protecting the Olympic

r 159

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

symbols. In so doing, it broadened the administrative avenues for seeking relief
against infringers of IPRs, and provided a more practical basis for determining ﬁnes
and penalties for infringement of all forms of IPRs. Third, as required by the
Olympic Charter and the host city contract, the Special Regulations not only
deﬁned the Olympic symbols, objects, the databases and statistics relating to the
Olympic Games to be protected, they also gave expansive protection to almost
every aspect of the Olympic-related IPRs at the national level, and additionally
named the IOC, the COC and the BOCOG as the exclusive and collective right
owners of the Olympic symbols and marks, and spelt out their respective rights
(Mendel and Yijun, 2003).

Further commitment to streamline the protection and enforcement of IPRs was
also shown with the enactment of the Measures for the Recordal and Administra-
tion of Olympic Insignia (the Measures). The Measures mandated the owners of the
Olympic insignias to record any insignias and licences to use such insignias with the
trademark ofﬁce. All the licences for the use of recorded insignias had to be in
writing, and had to include the particulars of the Olympic insignia, recordal
number, the licensed products or services to be used, the territory covered by the
licence and the period of the licence. Any entity or person who contravened the
Measures would be liable to a ﬁne of up to RMB 10,000 (Wang, 2005, p. 302;
Wong, 2002, pp. 45–9). Yet another area that the Government of China has worked
hard to protect is that concerning consumers’ rights and interests. The enactment of
the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Protection of Consumer Rights and
Interests was seen as a means of broadening the scope of IP to make it more
responsive to the needs of the innovators and consumers (State Administration for
Industry & Commerce (SAIC), 1993). This piece of law has effectively boosted the
ﬁght against piracy and counterfeiting, and improved the enforcement of IPRs as
well as the protection of the consumers against inferior and dangerous products. Its
effectiveness was demonstrated by an incident where a counterfeit baby food plant
was shut down in an effort to protect the consumers (Barboza, 2007; Johnson, 2006,
pp. 1032–3). As part of additional efforts to boost measures already in place to
ensure that the Olympic Games were a success, the Beijing Municipal Government
issued a decree aimed at protecting the Olympic-related IPRs. The decree placed all
the Olympic assets, which included the ﬁve Olympic rings, Olympic ﬂag, Olympic
motto, Olympic emblem and Olympic anthem of the IOC, terms such as Olympic,
Olympiad, Olympic Games and their abbreviation and production by participating
right holders, inter alia, under the protection of the Beijing Municipality (People’s
Daily Online, 2001).

General Administrative Measures to Strengthen IPR Protection
The administrative measures, which were introduced by the Chinese Government to
protect the Olympic-related IPRs, included the launching of a 1-year nationwide
campaign in 2004 to promote the protection of IPRs. In the same year, the
Government of China declared that 20–26 April of each year would be used to

160

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

educate the public through the mass and print media, seminars, conferences and the
internet about the critical importance of protecting IPRs countrywide in order to
improve their understanding of IPRs before, during and after the Olympic Games.
At the same time, different types of specialized IP courts were created to deal with
the increasing cases of IP infringement (Donatuti, 2007, pp. 214–6).

Other reforms aimed at strengthening the protection of domestic, and Olympic
IPRs included the setting up of special telephone hotlines backed by a web page for
monitoring and reporting IP crimes, the unveiling of China’s IP Manual by the
SIPO to the international community (SIPO, 2008), the establishment of legal
affairs and brand protection departments to combat IPR violations, and the
placement of anti-counterfeiting labels on all Olympic products using advanced
anti-counterfeiting technology to combat free rider and ambush marketing pro-
blems. In addition, the Government of China set aside about US$12.2 billion for
use in either closing or relocating high-polluting factories, improving infrastructure,
changing energy policies, reducing car emissions and solid waste control (Beyer,
2006, pp. 424, 428–9; Donatuti, 2007, pp. 226–8; Liu, 2007, p. 33). The conclusion
to be drawn from the above discourse is that China’s protection of IPRs has
improved a lot in recent years. The trend towards greater protection of IPRs has
been largely reinforced by accession to TRIPS even though tremendous updates
were also made to the country’s IP laws after it won the bid to host the 2008
Olympic Games (O’Flynn, 2008, pp. 1–3). What follows next is an analysis of a host
of challenges the Olympic Games presented for China, and an examination of
whether it took advantage of the rare chance of hosting the Olympic Games to show
the world that the protection and the enforcement of IPRs within the Chinese
boarders were actually possible using the plethora of IP laws it had at its disposal.

China’s Problems Before and After the Olympic Flame Flickered Out

The international attention China attracted was mainly due to the fact that the
Olympic Games brought to the fore a number of problems to which the country
could not have turned a blind eye. In the ﬁrst place, from the time China adopted
TRIPS, it had problems complying with, and enforcing, the provisions of the
agreement. In particular, it was established that China had not adequately satisﬁed
the enforcement provisions spelt out in articles 41–61 of TRIPS, a fact largely
evidenced by the lack of criminal liability in almost all its IP statutes. This, it
was reasoned, had cushioned and facilitated the proﬁtable production of all sorts
of pirated and counterfeited products, and enabled their entry into the stream of
commerce. Examples of the absence of criminal liability in Chinese IP statutes
can be seen in the Chinese Trademark Law, which allows damages for infringement
of marks to be calculated on the basis of the income obtained by the infringer from
the illegal use of the trademark as well as the Chinese Patent Law, which is quite
generous with individuals who deliberately infringe other people’s patents. The
patent law uses the patentee’s losses or the infringer’s earnings as the basis for

r 161

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

calculation of damages. The Copyright Law is also quite contradictory in so far as it
allows the seizure of the instruments used to produce the infringing products
without giving guidelines as to what is to be done with the infringing goods.
Fortunately, the Special Regulations mentioned above to a certain extent addressed
some of these problems by imposing penalties that were considered adequate to
deter persons who engaged or contemplated engaging in acts of piracy, counter-
feiting or other related violations even where such persons had derived no income
from their unlawful activities. In addition, the regulations required that the
calculation of damages be based on the licensing fee originally imposed on the
Olympic asset, and not on the proﬁts gained by the infringer through predetermined
infraction of certain proprietary rights (Omario, 2007, pp. 1280–1, 1284).

The second issue that was likely to pose a problem for China during the
Olympics had really nothing to do with the protection and enforcement of IPRs, but
with the publicity rights of the athletes, particularly the celebrity athletes taking part
in the Olympic Games. The reason for apprehension was because some IP observers
had dismissed the provisions concerning the protection of personal rights as being
too general to be relied upon to protect effectively any athlete or celebrity athlete
against the misappropriation of his/her identity, name, voice, portrait or image
during or after the Olympic Games. Accordingly, they argued for the enactment of
speciﬁc laws to protect the various aspects of personality rights against misuse
(Levine, 2008, pp. 272–4).

The right to publicity, which is one of the fundamental branches of the tort of
appropriation, is one of the most valuable and long lasting assets a celebrity athlete
can ever possess. In most countries, this right is either governed by statutes or falls
under common law (Rowland, 2002, pp. 1–6). There are a number of cases that
illustrate the extent to which courts in different jurisdictions have gone to ensure
that the right is protected. The most notable court decision was the one in Hirsch v
S.C. Johnson & Son Inc.,2 where an action was brought against a manufacturer for
unauthorized use of the professional football player’s nickname ‘‘Crazylegs’’ on a
shaving gel. In this case, the court, observing that right of publicity extended
not only to an individual’s name, but also to a nickname or stage name, held that
the player’s common law rights had been infringed. Another decision on this right
was in the case of Lombardo v Doyle, Dane & Bernbach Inc.,3 where a band leader by
the name of Guy Lombardo instituted a suit claiming that an agency and a
manufacturer had used his ‘‘likeness and representation’’ without his consent,
thereby violating his statutory right to privacy under New York laws, and his
common law right to be free from the misappropriation of his cultivated public
persona as ‘‘Mr New Year’s Eve’’. These are just a few examples, but they
nevertheless bring to light two key issues that must be considered. The ﬁrst one is
whether the IOC has the capacity to tackle disputes brought before it involving
athletes as well as those touching on the infringement of the Olympic-related IPRs,
and, if so, how it handles the disputes of either disciplinary, eligibility, doping or
contractual nature between athletes and a federation or those involving national

162

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

and international bodies or sponsors of the Olympic Games. The second issue is
whether a sports ﬁgure can seek protection under the Chinese IP laws if his or her
persona is appropriated for commercial use. In answer to the ﬁrst question, there is
need to look into to the Olympic Charter, which, as already indicated, codiﬁes the
fundamental principles, rules and by-laws used by the IOC. Though the charter
does not make it clear as to whether the IOC is a corporation or public body
(Fridman, 1999, pp. 781–98), article 15.1 and 15.4 thereof contain provisions with
respect to the organization’s legal status. According to this article, the IOC is a legal
person, recognized by the Swiss Federal Council in accordance with an agreement
that was signed on 1 November 2000. The decisions undertaken by the IOC are
ﬁnal, and their application and interpretation can only be done by the IOC’s
Executive Board or, in case there is an enforceable arbitration agreement between
the warring parties, by the Court of Arbitration for Sports (CAS). The CAS,
founded in 1983, was the brainchild of Juan Antonio Samaranch, the former
president of the IOC, who, on appointment as such, saw the need for the establish-
ment of a specialized body or a supreme court of world sport, whose key role would
be to resolve all sport-related disputes outside the normal court system. The CAS
was under the strict control and supervision of the IOC until 1994, when its
structure underwent sweeping reforms following a Swiss ruling in the Elmar Gundel
v F ´ed ´eration E´questre Internationale and Court of Arbitration for Sport case, dated
15 March 1993, that questioned its impartiality and recommended that the court be
made organizationally and ﬁnancially independent from the IOC.4

A subsequent conference meeting to modify its structure led to the formation of
the International Council of Arbitration for Sport (ICAS), which took over the
supervision and management of CAS from the IOC. All the reforms to the structure of
the IOC were codiﬁed in a detailed set of rules entitled the Code of Sports-related
Arbitration, in force since November 1994. The CAS provides the jurisdiction, and
allows the parties appearing before it to choose the applicable law. Where the parties
cannot decide upon the law to govern the resolution of their dispute, the Swiss law
applies. An appeal against decisions by CAS is possible only on points of law and
provided there is no clause in an arbitration agreement precluding the same. An appeal
on issues concerning the application of sporting rules is not possible (Blackshaw, 2003,
pp. 61–8).

For the purposes of settling Olympic-related disputes, the CAS is empowered to
setup ad hoc courts during the Olympics in selected countries, as, for example, those
constituted in New York City, Beijing and Sydney, to handle sports disputes within
24 hours in order to avoid the winding arbitration processes, which may take several
months. All Olympic International Federations as well as a good number of NOCs
recognize the jurisdiction of the CAS to arbitrate sport-related disputes that cannot
be amicably settled, and have, to this end, included an arbitration clause in their
sport statutes referring sports disputes to it (Gubi, 2008, pp. 1012–16). Additionally,
on 27 May 2003 the Tribunal Federal Suisse (Supreme Court) held that in cases
where the IOC is a party to a sporting dispute, the CAS qualiﬁes as an arbitral

r 163

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

tribunal within the meaning of Swiss arbitration law. This decision, it was ruled,
would apply also to disputes not involving the IOC.5 Before answering the question
whether athletes, particularly celebrity ones, have any legal recourse before the
Chinese courts in cases where their likeness, names and phrases with which they are
associated or names of characters they once played or their images have been
appropriated for commercial purposes without payment, it is important to deﬁne the
right publicity. This right, which developed from two areas of law, privacy and
intellectual property, prevents the unauthorized commercial use of an individual’s
name, likeness, voice or other recognizable aspects of his/her persona, and gives the
individual the right to control the commercial use of certain aspects of his/her
personality, and to proﬁt there from (McKenna, 2005, pp. 232–3).

Over the years, courts have struggled to delineate the parameters of this right, to
determine what aspects of a personality may be protected against illicit appropriation,
and who may actually bring a civil action for violation of the right. As a result of this
uncertainty, the past decade has seen the law expand the scope of this right to include
practically any use of an individual’s image, likeness, voice, nickname, performing
style or voice imitation by a third party, which brings about some form of commercial
advantage (Dogan and Lemley, 2006, pp. 1161–2; Schlachter, 2005, pp. 471–3). In
order to protect the reputation of the citizens against unwarranted and baseless
attacks, the Constitution of China, which is the source of all the legislations on the
protection of personal rights, prohibits in article 38, insults, defamatory libel, false
accusations or false incriminations, which are likely to injure and/or seriously affect
the reputation of the person targeted. The same article also stipulates that the personal
dignity of citizens of China is inviolable (People’s Daily Online, 1982).6

To this end, in China, rather than a separate right of publicity, the General
Principles of the Civil Law of China (Centre for Computer Law, 1989) is drawn to
protect all the categories of IPRs as well as the right of name, honour, reputation
and portrait. Unfortunately, the circumstances under which infringers could incur
strict liability are not speciﬁed (Zheng, 1986, p. 698). Nevertheless, the protection of
the aforementioned rights clearly confers the right to sue for compensation, in cases
where a citizen’s right to portrait, personal name, reputation or honour has been
infringed upon. In addition, the General Principles of the Civil Law of China
accords the citizen the right to prevent any insulting use of his portrait or his/her
name (Epstein, 1986, pp. 734–5, 738).7

The portrait right is however not absolute. This was demonstrated by a case
ﬁled in Haidian District People’s Court in Beijing by a famous Chinese athlete, Liu
Xiang, against Life Style Magazine. In this case, Liu Xiang claimed that Life Style
Magazine had infringed upon his portrait right by publishing his picture on its front
page above an advertisement for Zhong You, a local department store, in a manner
that was likely to imply that he had endorsed the department store. While
categorizing portraits into those that are independent of any special signiﬁcant
public event and those that may be associated with a special signiﬁcant public event,
and observing that the portrait right for the former is absolute whereas that for the

164

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

latter is subject to limitations, the court held that Liu Xiang’s portrait rights had not
been infringed upon. However, on appeal the Beijing No. 1 Intermediate Court held
that Liu Xiang’s portrait rights had been infringed upon in so far as the design of
the cover page clearly suggested a connection between him and Zhong You
Department Store, and accordingly amounted to unauthorized commercial use of
his portrait. The court also held that by making amendments to Liu Xiang’s photo,
the magazine had ignored his portrait rights, resulting in a breach of article 13 of the
Advertisement Law (SAIC, 1994), which expressly required a clear distinction of
advertisements from other contents and also prohibited advertisements that were
likely to mislead the consumers into thinking that they were in some way connected
to the other contents. The court went ahead and awarded Liu Xiang a sum of RMB
20,000 (US$2,500) as damages, and compelled Life Style Magazine to issue a
written apology to him in their magazine (Ordish, 2005, pp. 34–7; Rouse, 2006). The
Liu Xiang case and many other similar cases show that the limitless endeavours to
beneﬁt from another’s fame, name or portrait, whatever the case may be, are now
provoking effective responses from the courts, and have led to increased protection
of the right of publicity in China (Levine, 2008, pp. 272–4).

This brings us to the third and quite an important issue. The enforcement of IP
laws still remains a problem in China despite stronger and increased statutory
protection coupled with a wide range of anti-piracy campaigns. The problem of
enforcement is compounded by the fact that the penalties and sanctions for IP crimes
are too low, which has the effect of limiting deterrence of misuse of IPRs. Closely tied
to this problem, is the fact that the Chinese IP system is divided into multitudes of trial
divisions, namely civil, economic, administrative and criminal, all of which have a role
to play in the protection and enforcement of IP. The segmentation of the IP trial
courts has resulted in overlapping duties, and has hindered the effective protection
and enforcement of IP laws. The situation is further worsened by the existence of 12
additional primary state organizations, which are responsible for various aspects of IP
protection. It was, and still is, critical to the protection and enforcement of all forms of
IPRs, and to the successful navigation through the Olympic Games, and thereafter,
for China to toughen penalties for IP crimes so as to deter infringement, and to
prevent continued infraction of IPRs. In this regard, it may also be important for the
country to consider amalgamating the multiple IP courts and organizations to permit
a more stable protection and enforcement of all facets of IP (Donatuti, 2007,
pp. 216–9; Levine, 2008, pp. 219–21).

Continued Infringement Despite China’s Strong IP Reforms

Despite having in place a whole set of laws geared at preventing the proﬁting from
the widespread breach of proprietary rights, China continues to ﬁght to cast off the
‘‘piracy haven’’ label. Indeed, there have been concerted efforts by manufacturers,
brand owners and law makers to combat the many different forms of piracy
problems prevailing in China. A report issued by the Bush administration estab-

r 165

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

lished that rampant piracy of ﬁlm, music, publishing and software products, as well
as infringement of pharmaceutical, chemical and other patents, and counterfeiting
of consumer goods, electrical equipments, car parts and industrial products was still
the order of the day (Becker, 2003). Although the laws China enacted and the
measures it took to reinforce the protection and enforcement of IPRs were
considered satisfactory in some quarters, some aspects of the Chinese youthful IP
laws still presented loopholes that the unrelenting IPR infringers were able to
exploit. Indeed, the cause for optimism brought about by the achievements, which
China rolled-out to modernize its IPR regime, and protect Olympic-related IPRs,
was thwarted by a number of repeated cases of infringements of IPRs during the
Olympic Games. For example, despite the fact that design and production teams,
and thousands of cast members were required to sign conﬁdentiality agreements,
and received warnings to the effect that breaches of the secrecy agreement would be
punishable by up to 7 years in jail, still some foreign journalists were able to sneak
into the National Stadium in July 2008 and take unauthorized video footage
featuring the dress rehearsal for the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games
and post it on the internet (Toy and Liu, 2008). China’s IP enforcement dilemma
came further to a boil when Fang Shouwei ﬁled a lawsuit at an intermediate court in
Beijing’s Haidian District claiming that the BOCOG had violated his IPRs by
failing to give him the credit for the event’s ofﬁcial slogan, ‘‘One World, One
Dream’’. This ‘‘hunter has become the hunted’’ sort of a case threatened to
embarrass the BOCOG, which had repeatedly stressed its commitment to protecting
and enforcing IPRs, and had promised to issue a certiﬁcate of recognition to any
Olympic participant whose slogan was adopted. Additionally, recent reports show
that in the ﬁrst quarter of this year, the AIC, with the help of the BOCOG, had to
deal with about 400 infringement cases involving Olympic-related IPRs (O’Flynn,
2008, p. 9). It was also reported that the counterfeiting activities were not just
conﬁned to the hard-good arena, but extended far and wide into the internet, where
some IPR contraveners transacted criminal activities, such as launching shadow
websites purporting to offer tickets, travel and other Olympic-sponsored goods and
services. The above discussion shows that while China’s seriousness about increas-
ing efforts to protect and enforce IPRs had some positive impact, these efforts
would have presented a tremendous advancement in the protection and enforce-
ment of IPRs if they had been drawn to protect non-Olympic branded goods as well
(Long, 2008, p. 6). Consequently, even though the Olympic Games are over, China
still needs to rethink its commitment to effective protection and enforcement of
IPRs, and begin to act more decisively in this area.

Conclusion

This article has shown that China has enough laws to protect and enforce
practically all forms of IPRs as required by TRIPS. All it needs to do is to put
them to more effective use so as to eliminate enforcement problems before they

166

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

begin, and future ones before they become overwhelming. For a country like China
with a reputation ‘‘as a sort of no man’s land for IPRs’’ (French, 2007), the hosting
of the Olympic Games brought the problems of weak IP protection and enforce-
ment to the forefront, and was perhaps also the litmus test that was expected to
nudge it towards greater respect for IPRs of other people. Indeed, as events like the
Olympic Games and new technologies continue to present the world with new forms
of piracy, the need for the formulation of tougher strategies for dealing with the new
anti-piracy and enforcement challenges has become an extremely urgent matter not
just for China, but for all WTO member states. As for China whose IP laws are
generally considered lax due to their lack of enforcement power, a review and/or
change of stance on IP protection and enforcement through the education of the
general populace on the value of IP, and its importance in encouraging creativity
and innovation, is needed. Improving the understanding of the basic tenets of IP is
also as crucial as the raising of the awareness of the public to the fact that buying
fake goods or illegally copying digital content of IP products is a crime that is
punishable by stiff penalties. As part of the education and awareness-raising
strategy, it is necessary to provide specialized and continuous technical training
and education to the IP judges, lawyers, prosecutors, customs and police ofﬁcials
responsible for the protection and the enforcement of IPRs. The legislative measures
that China put in place during the Olympic Games for protection and enforcement of
all forms of IPRs, including the Olympic-related IPRs, could, if effectively imple-
mented, bring advancements in IPR protection and enforcement, whose beneﬁts are
likely to be seen beyond the Olympic Games. Describing the Olympic Games as
China’s coming-out party, the British foreign ofﬁce minister Mark Malloch-Brown
said it was recommendable for the country to ‘‘take great care to do nothing that will
wreck the Olympics’’(Spencer, 2008). China did exactly this, and the XXIX Olympiad
has been hailed as the most successful, expensive and lavish in the Olympic history.
Now that the unique and ritualized Olympic Games are over, it is hoped that the
‘‘future level’’ of the Chinese respect for the IPRs of other people will be as striking as
their sporting prowess, the organizational skills they displayed during the Olympic
Games, and as successful as the Games themselves were.

About the Author

Brenda Pamela Mey (Ongech), LL.M., (JGU-Mainz), a doctoral student of law at
the Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU), Munich, Germany, was formerly a
Doctoral Associate at the Max Planck Institute for Intellectual Property, Competi-
tion and Tax Law, Munich, Germany; e-mail: MaganaBpo@t-online.de

Notes

1 The Sydney 2000 Games (Indicia and Images) Protection Act 1996, No. 22, 1996 was

repealed by act no. 8 of 2007 on 15 March 2007. Available online at hhttp://
www.chinaiprlaw.com/english/laws/laws.htmi [Accessed June 2008].

2 90 Wis.2d 379, 280 N.W. 2d 129, 205 US P.Q. 920 (Wis. 1979).

r 167

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

3 58 A.D.2d 620, 396 N.Y.S. 2d 661 (App. Div. 1977).
4 Swiss Federal Tribunal, 1st Civil Div., Judgment of 15 March 1993, reported in Recueil
Ofﬁciel des Arreˆ ts du Tribunal F ´ed ´eral [Ofﬁcial Digest of Federal Tribunal Judgements],
119 II 271, also summarized in I Digest of CAS Awards 56.

5 Case No. 4P. 267/2002, 4P. 268/2002, 4P. 269/2002, 4P. 270/2002.
6 By virtue of article 4 of the constitution, foreign nationals living in China are equal and

enjoy equal rights with the Chinese people.

7 See articles 99–102 and 120 of the General Principles of the Civil Law of the People’s

Republic of China, reprinted in Epstein (1986).

References

Assafa, E. (2007) ‘Do Asian Nations Take Intellectual Property Rights Seriously?’, SCRIPT-
ed [online], 4(2), 166–79. Available at hhttp://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrc/script-ed/vol4-2/
endeshaw.pdfi [Accessed May 2008].

Barboza, D. (2007) ‘In Food Safety Crackdown, China Closes 180 Plants’, The New York

Times, 27 June.

Becker, E. (2003) ‘International Business: Report Faults China’s Policy Since it Joined Trade

Group’, The New York Times, 20 December.

Beijing Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games (2002) ‘The Regulations on the
Protection of Olympic Symbols’, adopted on 30 January 2002, promulgated on 4
February 2002 and in force from 1 April 2002. Available at hhttp://en.beijing2008.cn/98/
69/article211986998.shtmli [Accessed May 2008].

Beijing Municipal Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (2001) ‘Beijing Regulations’, adopted on 9

October 2001 and in force from 1 November 2001 [online]. Available at hhttp://
aoyun.bjipo.gov.cn/web/english/public/articleDetail.jsp?cmArticleID=12091053070001i
[Accessed July 2008].

Beyer, S. (2006) ‘The Green Olympic Movement: Beijing 2008’, Chinese Journal of

International Law, 5(2), 423–40.

Bird, C. R. (2006) ‘Defending Intellectual Property Rights in the BRIC Economies’, America

Business Law Journal, 43(2), 317–63.

Blackshaw, I. (2003) ‘The Court of Arbitration for Sport: An International Forum for

Settling Disputes Effectively ‘‘Within the Family of Sport’’’, Entertainment Law, 2(2),
61–83.

Center for Advanced Defence Studies (2006) ‘‘The Intellectual property Challenges in

China’’, Directorate of Research, Defence Concepts Series, July, 1–5.

Center for Computer Law. (1989) ‘The General Principles of the Civil Law of the People’s

Republic of China adopted on 12 April 1986, and effective as of 1 January 1987’,
Software Law Journal, 3(2), 345–69.

Chuanjiao, X. (2008) ‘New Drive to Better Protect Olympic Games’ Rights’, China Daily, 13

June.

Curthoys, J. and Kendall, N. C. (2001) ‘Ambush Marketing and the Sydney 2000 Games
(Indicia and Images) Protection Act: A Retrospective’, Murdoch University Electronic
Journal of Law [online], 8(2). Available at hhttp://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/issues/
v8n2/kendall82_text.htmli [Accessed June 2008].

168

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

Dogan, L. S. and Lemley, A. M. (2006) ‘What the Right of Publicity Can Learn From

Trademark Law’, Stanford Law Review, 58(4), 1161–220.

Donatuti, L. J. (2007) ‘Can China Protect the Olympics, or Should the Olympics be Protected

from China?’, Journal of Intellectual Property Law, 15(1), 203–37.

Drezner, W. D. (2007) ‘The New New World Order’, Foreign Affairs, March/April.
Epstein, J. E. (1986) ‘The Evolution of China’s General Principles of Civil Law’, The

American Journal of Comparative Law, 34, 705–43.

French, W. H. (2007) ‘China Media Battle Hints at Shift on Intellectual Property’, The New

York Times, 6 January.

Frey, M., Iraldo, F. and Melis, M. (2008) The Impact of Wide-Scale Sport Events on Local

Development: An Assessment of the XXth Torino Olympics Through the Sustainability Report
[online], April. Available at hhttp://ssrn.com/abstract=1117967i [Accessed April 2008].
Fridman, S. (1999) ‘Conﬂict of Interest, Accountability and Corporate Governance: The
Case of the IOC and SOCOG’, University of New South Wales Law Journal [online],
22(3), 781–98. Available at hhttp://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/UNSWLJ/1999/
28.htmli [Accessed July 2008].

Furrer, P. (2002) ‘Sustainable Olympic Games: A Dream or a Reality?’, Bollettino della

Societa` Geograﬁca Italiana, Serie XII, VII(4), 1–31.

Gubi, J. (2008) ‘The Olympic Binding Arbitration Clause and the Court of Arbitration for
Sport: An Analysis of Due Process Concerns’, Fordham Intellectual Property Media &
Entertainment Law Journal, 18(4), 997–1016.

Heermann, W. P. (2003) ‘Gewerbliche Schutzrechte an olympischen Symbolen’ [online].

Paper presented at the Faculty of Law of University of Athens, 22 May. Available at
hhttp://www.sportrecht.org/onlineaufsaetze.htmi [Accessed May 2008].

International Olympic Committee (2007) ‘Olympic Charter’, in force from 7 July 2007

[online]. Available at hhttp://multimedia.olympic.org/pdf/en_report_122.pdfi [Accessed
July 2008].

International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (1961) ‘The International

Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants’ of 2 December 1961, as
revised at Geneva on 10 November 1972, on 23 October 1978, and on 19 March 1991
[online]. Available at hhttp://www.upov.int/en/publications/conventions/1991/
act1991.htmi [Accessed May 2008].

Iyengar, J. (2004) ‘Intellectual Property Piracy Rocks China Boat’ [online]. Asia Times

Online, 16 September. Available at hhttp://www.atimes.com/atimes/china/
ﬁ16ad07.htmli [Accessed June 2008].

Johnson, P. R. (2006) ‘Steal This Note: Proactive Protection in the People’s Republic of

China’, Connecticut Law Review, 38(July), 1005–39.

Joint Press Statement. (2007) 16th EU-Japan Summit Berlin [online], 5 June. Available at
hhttp://www.eu2007.de/en/News/download_docs/Juni/0506-RAA1/010Statement.pdfi
[Accessed July 2008].

Kuper, H. G. and Sterken, E. (2001) Olympic Participation and Performance Since 1896

[online], January. Available at hhttp://ssrn.com/abstract=274295i [Accessed July 2008].
Levine, F. J. (2007) ‘Meeting the Challenge of International Brand Expansion in Professional
Sports: Intellectual Property Rights Enforcement in China Through Treaties, Chinese
Law and Cultural Mechanisms’, Texas Review of Entertainment and Sports Law,
9(February), 203–29.

r 169

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Levine, F. J. (2008) ‘A Golden Opportunity for Global Acceptance? How Hosting the

Olympic Games Impacts a Nation’s Economy and Intellectual Property Rights with a
Focus on Publicity’, Sports Lawyers Journal, 15, 245–77.

Liu, H. J. (2007) ‘Lighting the Torch of Human Righty: The Olympic Games as a Vehicle for

Human Rights Reform’, Northwestern Journal of International Human Rights, 5(2),
213–35.

Long, E. D. (2008) ‘Intellectual Property Protection in China, Post-Olympics’, The National

Law Journal, 18(August), 1–2.

McKenna, P. M. (2005) ‘The Right of Publicity and Autonomous Self-Deﬁnition’, University

of Pittsburgh Law Review, 67(1), 225–94.

Mendel, F. and Yijun, C. (2003) ‘Protecting Olympic Intellectual Property’, China Law and

Practice, 17(4), 33–4.

Nafziger, A. R. J. (1992) ‘International Sports Law: A Replay of Characteristics and Trends’,

American Journal of International Law, 86(July), 489–518.

New, W. (2007) ‘US Lawmakers Seek to Fuel International IP Enforcement Activities’, IP-

Watch Monthly Reporter, 8 November.

O’Flynn, T. (2008) ‘The Olympics and Chinese Intellectual Property Law: Playing the Game’,

Sports, Law Administration and Practice, 15(4), 1–3.

Omario, K. (2007) ‘Paper Dragon: Inadequate Protection of Intellectual Property Rights in

China’, Michigan Journal of International Law, 27(1/2), 1261–86.

Ordish, R. (2005) ‘Sports Marketing in China: An IP Perspective’, China Business Review,

32(6), 34–7.

People’s Daily Online (1982) ‘The Constitution of the People’s Republic of China, adopted 4
December 1982, and amended in 1988, and again in 1993’, People’s Daily Online [online].
Available at hhttp://english.peopledaily.com.cn/constitution/constitution.htmli
[Accessed August 2008].

People’s Daily Online (2001) ‘Beijing Launches Decree to Fight Ambush Marketing’,

People’s Daily Online 1 November.

Rouse (2006) ‘Liu Xiang Sues Magazine for use of His Image’, China Intellectual Property

Express, 272, 6 April.

Rowland, M. B. (2002) ‘An Athlete’s Right of Publicity’, Florida Bar Journal, LXXVI, 1–15.
Ruichun, D. (1998) ‘China’s Intellectual Property Rights Protection: Towards the 21st

Century’, Duke Journal of Computing and International Law, 9(1), 215–8.

Schlachter, M. D. (2005) ‘Adjudicating the Right of Publicity in Three Easy Steps’, Journal of

Law and Policy, 14(1), 471–523.

Spencer, R. (2008) ‘Dalai Lama Will Resign if Tibet Violence Worsens’, The Telegraph Media

Group, 19 March.

State Administration for Industry & Commerce (1993) ‘The Law of the People’s Republic of
China on Protection of Consumer Rights and Interests’, adopted on 31 October 1993,
promulgated by Order No. 11 on the same date and effective as of 1 January 1994
[online]. Available at hhttp://www.saic.gov.cn/english/Laws%20and%20Regulations/
t20060227_14639.htmi [Accessed June 2008].

State Administration for Industry & Commerce (1994) ‘Advertisement Law of the People’s
Republic of China’, adopted on 27 October 1994, promulgated by Order No. 34 on the
same date and effective as of 1 February 1995 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.saic.

170

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

gov.cn/english/Laws%20and%20Regulations/t20060227_14640.htmi [Accessed May
2008].

State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (1982) ‘Trademark Law of the People’s Republic of China’,
adopted on 23 August 1982, revised for the ﬁrst time on 22 February 1993, and for the
second time on 27 October 2001 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.sipo.gov.cn/
sipo_English/laws/relatedlaws/200204/t20020416_34755.htmi [Accessed June 2008].
State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (1984) ‘Patent Law of the People’s Republic of China’,

adopted on 12 March 1984, amended for the ﬁrst time on 4 September 1992, and for the
second time on 25 August 2000 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.sipo.gov.cn/
sipo_English/laws/lawsregulations/200203/t20020327_33872.htmi [Accessed June 2008].
State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (1990) ‘Copyright Law of the People’s Republic of China’,

adopted on 7 September 1990, and revised on 27 October 2001 [online]. Available at
hhttp://www.sipo.gov.cn/sipo_English/laws/relatedlaws/200204/t20020416_34754.htmi
[Accessed July 2008].

State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (1993) ‘Law Against Unfair Competition of the People’s

Republic of China’, adopted on 2 September 1993, promulgated by Order No. 10 on 2
September 1993, and effective as of 1 December 1993 [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.sipo.gov.cn/sipo_English/laws/relatedlaws/200204/t20020420_34756.htmi
[Accessed July 2008].

State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (1996) ‘Regulations on the Administration of Special Signs’,
promulgated on 13 July 1996 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.sipo.gov.cn/sipo_English/
specialtopic/IPManual/200807/t20080703_409889.hti [Accessed July 2008].

State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (2003) ‘Regulations of the People’s Republic of China on

Customs Protection of Intellectual Property Rights’, in force from 1 March 2004
[online]. Available at hhttp://www.sipo.gov.cn/sipo_English/specialtopic/IPManual/
200805/t20080520_401413.htmi [Accessed July 2008].

State Intellectual Property Ofﬁce (2008) China’s IP Manual [online]. Available at hhttp://

www.sipo.gov.cn/sipo_English/specialtopic/IPManual/i [Accessed May].

Toy, M. A. and Liu, G. S. (2008) ‘Koreans Score a Sneak Peek’, The Canberra Times, 31 July.
Wang, H. S. (2005) ‘Great Olympics, New China: Intellectual Property Enforcement Steps
Up to the Mark’, Loyala of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review, 27,
291–322.

Wong, K. (2002) ‘Hong Kong: China’s Pledge to Protect Olympic IP Rights’, Hong Kong

Lawyer Magazine, October, 45–9.

World Intellectual Property Organization (1883) ‘The Paris Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property’ of 20 March 1883, as revised at Brussels on 14 December 1900, at
Washington on 2 June 1911, at the Hague on 6 November 1925, at London on 2 June
1934, at Lisbon on 31 October 1958, at Stockholm on 14 July 1967, and as last amended
on 28 September 1979 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/paris/
trtdocs_wo020.htmli [Accessed May 2008].

World Intellectual Property Organization (1886) ‘The Berne Convention for the Protection of

Literary and Artistic Works’ of 9 September 1886, completed at Paris on 4 May 1896,
revised at Berlin on 13 November 1908, completed at Berne on 20 March 1914, revised at
Rome on 2 June 1928, at Brussels on 26 June 1948, at Stockholm on 14 July 1967, at Paris
on 24 July 1971, and as last amended on 28 September 1979 [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/trtdocs_wo001.htmli [Accessed May 2008].

r 171

Brenda Pamela Mey

China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

World Intellectual Property Organization (1891) ‘The Madrid Agreement Concerning the

International Registration of Marks’ of 14 April 1891, as revised at Brussels on 14
December 1900, at Washington on 2 June 1911, at the Hague on 6 November 1925, at
London on 2 June 1934, at Nice on 15 June 1957, at Stockholm on 14 July 1967, and as
last amended on 28 September 1979 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/madrid/
en/legal_texts/trtdocs_wo015.htmli [Accessed May 2008].

World Intellectual Property Organization (1957) ‘The Budapest Treaty on the International
Recognition of the Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure’,
done at Budapest on 28 April 1977, and amended on 26 September 1980 [online].
Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/registration/budapest/
trtdocs_wo002.htmli [Accessed May 2008].

World Intellectual Property Organization (1961) ‘International Convention for the

Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations’,
done at Rome on 26 October 1961 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/treaties/
en/ip/rome/trtdocs_wo024.htmli [Accessed July 2008].

World Intellectual Property Organization (1970) ‘The Patent Cooperation Treaty’, done at

Washington on 19 June 1970, amended on 2 October 1979, modiﬁed on 3 February
1984, and on 3 October 2001 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/pct/en/
index.htmli [Accessed May 2008].

World Intellectual Property Organization (1971a) ‘The Convention for the Protection of

Producers of Phonograms Against Unauthorised Duplication’ of 29 October 1971
[online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/phonograms/
trtdocs_wo023.htmli [Accessed May 2008].

World Intellectual Property Organization (1971b) ‘The Nice Agreement Concerning the

International Classiﬁcation of Goods and Services for the Purpose of the Registration of
Marks’ of 15 June 1957, as revised at Stockholm on 14 July 1967, at Geneva on 13 May
1977, and as amended on 28 September 1979 [online]. Available at hhttp://
www.wipo.int/treaties/en/classiﬁcation/nice/trtdocs_wo019.htmli [Accessed May 2008].
World Intellectual Property Organization (1971c) ‘The Strasbourg Agreement Concerning

the International Patent Classiﬁcation’ of 24 March 1971, as amended on 28 September
1979 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/classiﬁcation/strasbourg/i
[Accessed May 2008].

World Intellectual Property Organization (1977) ‘The Locarno Agreement Establishing an
International Classiﬁcation for Industrial Designs’ signed at Locarno on 8 October 1968,
and as amended on 28 September 1979 [online]. Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/
treaties/en/classiﬁcation/locarno/trtdocs_wo014.htmli [Accessed May 2008].

World Intellectual Property Organization (1989) ‘The Treaty on Intellectual Property in
Respect of Integrated Circuits’, done at Washington, DC, on 26 May 1989 [online].
Available at hhttp://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/washington/trtdocs_wo011.htmli
[Accessed July 2008].

World Trade Organization (1994) ‘Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights

(TRIPS)’, Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization (WTO), signed in Marrakesh Morocco on 15 April 1994 [online]. Available
at hhttp://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/t_agm0_e.htmi [Accessed May 2008].
Xinhua News Agency (2008a) ‘Beijing Olympics Hailed as ‘‘A Glorious Success’’, Editorial’,

25 August.

172

r China, the ‘‘Intellectual Property Black Hole’’ Hosts the XXIX Olympiad

Brenda Pamela Mey

Xinhua News Agency (2008b) ‘China Vows Harsher Punishment on Piracy’, 13 June.
Yu, K. P. (2006) ‘From Pirates to Partners (Episode II): Protecting Intellectual Property in

Post-WTO China’, American University Law Review, 55(4), 901–1000.

Yusuf, A. A. (1998) ‘TRIPS: Background, Principles and General Provisions’, in M. C.

Correa and A. A. Yusuf (eds), Intellectual Property and International Trade: TRIPS
Agreement, 17 September. Kluwer Law International, London, p. 528.

Zheng, R. H. (1986) ‘China’s New Civil Law’, The American Journal of Comparative Law, 34,

669–704.

r 173


